# Young Turkish Cypriots’ perceptions of nonstandard varieties and their speakers: learning ‘Posh’ Turkish in complementary schools

Çise Çavuşoğlu

To cite this article: Çise Çavuşoğlu (2024) Young Turkish Cypriots’ perceptions of nonstandard varieties and their speakers: learning ‘Posh’ Turkish in complementary schools, International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 27:9, 1199-1211, DOI: 10.1080/13670050.2021.1933895

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13670050.2021.1933895

# Young Turkish Cypriots’ perceptions of non-standard varieties and their speakers: learning ‘Posh’ Turkish in complementary schools

Çise Çavuşoğlu a,b

a Department of English Language Teaching, Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus; b Research Centre for Applied Linguistics, Near East University, Nicosia, Cyprus

# ABSTRACT

The current study aims to provide an understanding of how the relationships between standard and non-standard varieties of the Turkish language are perceived by young people of Turkish Cypriot descent within the context of Turkish complementary schools in London. These schools are set up by diasporic communities to fight/ reverse language shift and loss. They are also political spaces where cultural and linguistic practices are legitimised and delegitimized to help create an imagined community. Hence they provide rich contexts to investigate young people’s perceptions of standard and nonstandard varieties of languages. This study specifically draws on interview data of eight UK-born Turkish Cypriot young people, collected through a 13-month ethnographic study in a London-based Turkish complementary school. The results of the thematic analysis of the participants’ discourses showed that the participants thought that the role of the Turkish school was to teach the ‘proper’ variety, i.e. standard Turkish. Through the lens of Bourdieu’s capitals, the results indicated that the participants believed that acquiring this variety would make them become more ‘educated.’ However, some participants problematised the seemingly straightforward association between standard varieties and positive perceptions of their speakers, which raises important questions about rethinking the position of nonstandard varieties in education.

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 5 May 2021 Accepted 7 May 2021

# KEYWORDS

Non-standard varieties; standard Turkish; Cypriot Turkish; complementary schools; discourses; London

# Introduction

The urban, multilingual and superdiverse setting of London provides a rich context for understanding the interrelationships not only between different languages but also between different language varieties (Blommaert and Rampton 2011). Several previous studies have discussed how, in diasporic contexts, fears of language loss and aspirations for academic achievement lead to the provision of language instruction in minority communities (see Archer and Francis 2006; Çavuşoğlu 2014; İssa 2006; Karatsareas 2018, 2020 for examples). Many of these studies have also addressed how such language learning and teaching practices entail prioritisation of one variety over the others, causing silencing of specific varieties based on criteria such as correctness, properness, pronunciation and so on. Although similar arguments have been raised previously for mainstream education in countries where diglossic contexts are observed (see Hadjioannou, Tsiplakou, and Kappler 2011; Ioannidou 2004, 2009, 2012; Ioannidou and Sophocleous 2010; Tsiplakou 2007, 2011 for examples from the Cypriot context), one would expect the complementary school settings in urban multilingual places such as London to recognise the possibilities and linguistic varieties within which young people operate seamlessly in their everyday lives. As Creese et al. (2006) and others have argued earlier, complementary schools should be safe spaces to perform hybrid ethnic and linguistic identities since they are operated by community members themselves. However, in several studies, complexities caused by the standard language ideologies prevailing in complementary schools across the UK have been reported (see Çavuşoğlu 2019; Huang 2020; Karatsareas 2020). For instance, Francis, Archer, and Mau (2009) report how contesting discourses emerged among their participants in relation to varieties of Chinese, specifically between Cantonese and Mandarin, when referring to their identity positions. Furthermore, Karatsareas (2020) reports that the Cypriot variety of Greek is placed on a dichotomy of slang vs. posh against Standard Greek by his young participants of Greek Cypriot descent within the context of Greek complementary schools in London. On a similar note, Çavuşoğlu (2010) argues that teachers’ practices of teaching Standard Turkish in the Turkish complementary schools silence any attempt to use Cypriot Turkish by deeming it incorrect or inappropriate. In this respect, as Lytra (2012) argues, further investigations of young people’s experiences of multilingualism and identities within the context of complementary schools have ‘the potential to open up discursive spaces for producing more nuanced narratives of belonging and transforming the ideology of homogeneity that seems to characterise much of the teaching and learning in complementary schools’ (99). Thus, the current study aims to add to the existing literature by presenting findings of an ethnographic case study carried out in one of the Turkish complementary schools in London with respect to young people’s understandings of learning (standard) Turkish at the complementary school and their perceptions of a specific non-standard variety, namely Cypriot Turkish in the same setting. In this article, I will focus on young people’s perceptions of these two varieties of Turkish within their linguistic repertoires, at times complicating the otherwise seemingly straightforward relationship between language varieties and others’ perceptions of their speakers based on language use.

Cook and Simpson (2012) illustrate in their work how discourses around linguistic diversity are produced and circulated in domains such as the government, and how these interact with other discourses, resulting in changes in legislation. Wei (2011), for instance, describes how the complementary school’s practices of teaching Chinese in London have been influenced by the ‘changing hierarchies among varieties of the Chinese language as a result of the rising politico-economic power of mainland China’ (376). In other words, discourses of linguistic variation have practical implications in several domains and vice versa. Language instruction in complementary schools is closely linked to such discourses, where discourses circulating both inside and outside the community in relation to languages, language varieties, identities and ethnicities shape the kind of instruction provided. In addition, it is closely related to the norms and ideologies enacted and circulated, explicitly or implicitly, within the same context. Such teaching practices also have implications for young people’s discursive reactions to language learning in these complex settings, and therefore impact the possibilities of language maintenance within the community. Thus, the focus of the current study is the discourses through which young people operate when describing their experiences in relation to languages and language learning within the specific context of Turkish complementary schools in London.

# Theoretical framework: Bourdieu’s capitals and legitimate language

Bourdieu’s concept of different capitals is useful in understanding how languages and language varieties appear different discursive formations. Although Bourdieu’s theory is widely viewed as a theory of class relations, there have been attempts to use it in other research areas such as ethnicity/race and gender (Archer and Francis 2006). Essentially, Bourdieu’s work is related to relations of class and classed privileges/inequalities (Archer and Francis 2006), based on ‘capital’ movements through social space (Nash 1990; Skeggs 1997). According to Bourdieu (1986),

Capital is accumulated labor (in its materialized form or its ‘incorporated,’ embodied form) which, when appropriated on a private, i.e. exclusive, basis by agents or groups of agents, enables them to appropriate social energy in the form of reified or living labor (46).

In this perspective, capitals and distribution of their properties bring certain privileges, strengths and power to their bearers (Archer and Francis 2006; Skeggs 1997) and thus individuals are in a constant endeavour to try and increase their capitals where possible through social, economic, educational and cultural practices.

Bourdieu (1986) proposes a classification of four important capitals: (a) economic capital (including income and inherited wealth); (b) cultural capital (such as educational qualifications – this kind of capital can only exist in relation to other forms of capital and its value changes from context to context); (c) social capital (such as personal networks and group memberships); and (d) symbolic capital (form that different capitals take once they are legitimised). It is important to note here that all capitals are context specific and may generate different types and amounts of privilege/ effects depending on the context in which they are recognised and legitimised by social actors (Skeggs 1997). In this respect, Bourdieu strongly argues that educational institutions play an important role in this process of legitimisation, especially of linguistic practices. According to Bourdieu, this legitimisation process results in inequalities where specific forms of language are privileged and legitimised over others and certain linguistic practices are marked as ‘incorrect,’ pushing them into invisibility in the public arena by reducing their symbolic value (Bourdieu 1991).

When Bourdieu’s concepts are applied to educational settings, ‘the re/production of educational inequalities can be read as a product of the uneven distribution and deployment of forms of capital between different social groups and unequal encounters between working-class and middle-class habituses’ (Archer and Francis 2006, 31). To exemplify this, Archer and Francis suggest that middle-class families are able to provide better educational opportunities for their children, such as private tutoring and/or sending them to better schools, and thus are deploying their economic capital to increase their children’s cultural and social capitals (Archer and Francis 2006). In this way, the existing classed inequalities are reproduced (Archer and Francis 2006; Bourdieu and Passeron 1977). Thus, school becomes an important place where various forms of capital determines who will access what kinds of other capitals, as well as a place where different types of capitals can be acquired (Nash 1990).

One way that Turkish schools (and other community schools in the UK) claim to help young people is by providing them with extra support to succeed in mainstream schools as well as teaching them Turkish language and culture. It is claimed that these are useful to young people in their later academic and personal lives (Lytra and Baraç 2008; Sonyel 2005). The way these functions are promoted by the schools and the community can be understood within the framework of ‘capitals’ as it is conceptualised by Bourdieu. These concepts are very useful in analysing complementary schools, whose immediate functions, as claimed by its organisers, are to help young people achieve better results in their mainstream education by enabling them to attain good grades in standardised tests related to Turkish language (cultural capital), to teach them about ‘their’ languages and cultures, which may later be used in finding jobs (cultural and economic capital) and to help them in socialising with like-minded people from similar ethnic backgrounds (social capital) (Çavuşoğlu 2014). As the head of the school in which the current research was carried out had argued, ‘if these Turkish schools were not opened, young people would not know this Turkish that they are speaking now’ (Melek; school organiser). Bourdieu’s work was also relevant to my work in the way he pointed out to the inequalities caused by educational practices within schools as well as how schools (and wider educational and social discourses) mediated the type and amount of capital young people could acquire (Çavuşoğlu 2014). As I will be demonstrating in the following sections, young people have made references to all kinds of capitals in various ways in relation to their language learning experiences in the Turkish complementary school.

# Non-Standard language varieties and Cypriot Turkish in London

Language varieties in general and non-standard varieties in particular have always signalled to diversities within communities which otherwise are imagined as homogenous. These diversities may be attributed to several variables such as geographical location, educational background and social class. A reverse relationship between language varieties and language attitudes also exist: the variety spoken may cause specific attributions to be ascribed to the speakers of that variety by others through what Gal and Irvine (1995) call iconisation. Thus, positive qualities are usually ascribed to speakers of standard varieties, such as being ‘educated,’ while speakers of non-standard varieties are perceived to be of lower in rank, whatever the attribute is (Bourdieu and Passeron 1977). The case of Cypriot Turkish with respect to other varieties of Turkish, but more specifically with respect to standard Turkish (henceforth ST), has been identified as one of inferiority (Osam 2004) where speakers of this variety are perceived as having a lower level of education and occupations requiring less sophisticated skills, hence inevitably placing the speakers of the non-standard variety in lower social class positions (Lytra 2012). Even though language attitudes of Turkish Cypriots in Cyprus towards Cypriot Turkish are reported to be positive in general (Evripidou and Çavuşoğlu 2015), the variety is still perceived as ‘uneducated’ (Osam 2004). Lytra (2012) also explains how the ‘use of standard Turkish indexes a social group of “more educated” and “more knowledgeable” people’ (Lytra 2012, 92) by referring to iconisation (Irvine and Gal 2000). Despite this iconisation, perhaps as an extension of their positive perception of their own variety, Lytra (2012) also reports that speakers of Cypriot Turkish are perceived as performing a negative persona by other Turkish Cypriots when they use the standard/mainland Turkish in the context of Turkish complementary schools in London; they are perceived as being pretentious. Thus, Lytra’s findings signal to a more fluid and not so straightforward relationship between cultural capital, language attitudes and perceptions of speakers of different varieties.

The Cypriot variety of Turkish is syntactically, lexically and semantically different from the standard Turkish (Saraçoğlu 2004). While Turkish Cypriots use Cypriot Turkish in their everyday interactions, in schools across northern Cyprus, ST is used as the language of instruction in schools (Hadjioannou, Tsiplakou, and Kappler 2011). Turkish Cypriot people are also exposed to ST through various media channels, which are also broadcast in Cyprus and the UK. Therefore, an average Turkish Cypriot speaker engages with ST on an everyday basis. These linguistic and social practices, however, have deeper social meanings and significance in a number of ways (Gal and Irvine 1995). First, when a Cypriot Turkish speaker interacts with a ST speaker in a natural setting, the interaction soon comes to the question of ‘Where are you from?’ posed by the ST speaker. Although the interaction is in Turkish, the differences between the varieties, which are also observable when a Cypriot Turkish speaker attempts to use ST, lead to this question. This generic question brings (a) implications that one of the speakers must be from a ‘different’ place based on his/her utterances, and (b) implications of ‘insider-outsider,’ where the Turkish Cypriot speaker is positioned as the outsider due to his/her language use. Second, from an ideological point of view, ST is the most prestigious variety that everyone needs to acquire to be accepted into elite dominant groups (Bourdieu 1991) in the Turkish-speaking world. In this context, a Cypriot Turkish speaker is inevitably positioned as less sophisticated, regardless of the actual social class of the speaker.

As mentioned earlier, in the northern part of Cyprus, where Turkish is the official language, ST is taught in schools and is also used in media and formal literacy (Hadjioannou, Tsiplakou, and Kappler 2011). A study carried out among primary school teachers in northern Cyprus reports that the teachers claimed that they used ST at all times in class (Pehlivan and Menteşoğlu 2007). In such educational contexts, non-standard varieties are usually perceived by teachers as a deficit: ‘wrong’ language use that needs to be ‘fixed’ (Ioannidou et al. 2020). They are also seen as obstacles to academic success and are rarely thought of as cultural capital which can be later turned into economic capital. Nevertheless, recent studies have argued for the inclusion of non-standard varieties within the educational settings for several reasons (see Çavuşoğlu 2019; Karatsareas 2020 for examples).

Briefly, Ioannidou et al. (2020) list these benefits as (a) cognitive benefits, where using a familiar form of a language would facilitate language acquisition and critical literacies; (b) improvement in selfesteem by providing opportunities to change perceptions of inferiority on the part of the non-standard variety users; (c) and an increase in possibilities of language maintenance in migrant communities. Tegegne (2015, 2016) reiterates the same point by arguing that when the variety used by students’ everyday lives is used for educational purposes, better learning is achieved. Yet, standard language ideologies, which prioritise teaching of the standard forms by adhering to the grammatical correctness attributed by textbooks and dismiss non-standard forms within the classroom context by calling them ‘incorrect,’ appear to prevail (Çavuşoğlu 2010, 2019).

# Research context

The current research was conducted in one of the Turkish complementary schools in London, where majority of the students were from Turkish Cypriot backgrounds. Their families spoke the Cypriot Turkish variety at home. The organisers of the school were also migrants from Cyprus. The teachers in the school were contract teachers from Turkey (three participants) and northern Cyprus (one participant). These teachers were funded by the Republic of Turkey and the Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus governments for 2–5 year contracts respectively with the aim of supporting the educational activities of Turkish complementary schools across the UK. The school hosted young people largely from Turkish Cypriot backgrounds although there were a small number of young people who had recently migrated from Turkey as well. The students came from a wide range of social and economic backgrounds. While there were many students from working class families, there were also a small number of children of well-established and affluent families attending the school.

Having been run by the same people for over 20 years, the Turkish school where I collected the data was one of the most well-established Turkish schools in London. In an informal chat, Melek, the head teacher of the school, explained to me that although she experienced various difficulties when setting up the school, she did not give up so that the ‘Turkish children would not lose their traditions, customs, language, culture.’ A typical day at the school would commence at 9.45am on a Saturday morning and would continue until 12.45pm, where students would learn (standard) Turkish in their streamed classrooms. Students would be placed in these classrooms from level 1 to level 4 based on their teachers’ assessments of their prificiency in Turkish. Once students completed level 4, they were admitted to the GCSE and A-level preparation classes respectively, where teaching and learning would be more exam-based. At the end of each school day, the students would gather in the hall for the assembly, which included singing the Turkish national anthem in front of Turkish mainland and Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus flags and pictures of Mustafa Kemal Atatürk, and saying the Turkish Child’s Oath out loud as a group. While language teaching was the main focus of the teaching and learning practices in this context, those who wished to take part in extracurricular activities such as the homework club, folk dance and modern dance activities would stay for another two hours in the afternoon at school.

# Data collection and analysis

The data I will be presenting here comes from an ethnographic case study in one of the Turkish complementary schools in London. The data collection lasted for 13 months and at the end of this process, the data added up to $1 2 8 { \mathfrak { h } }$ and 5 min of observational fieldnotes, $1 6 \mathrm { { h } }$ and $5 3 \mathrm { \ m i n }$ of recorded interviews, and $1 0 \mathrm { { h } }$ and 33 min of natural speech recordings. In the research context, participants who (i) had at least one parent of Turkish Cypriot origin and (ii) were between the ages of 11 and 16 were invited to participate in the study. In this paper, I will mainly be drawing on data collected through interviews with eight young people and my ethnographic observations of their everyday practices at the school. In addition, two focal students (one boy and one girl) carried radio-mics around the school for two weeks each, recording their verbal interactions throughout their school day as I also observed them over a period of four weeks in total. These two participants were selected because they both attended the level 4 Turkish language class, where Turkish language instruction was provided at the highest level, before they moved on to the GCSE class. Following the analysis of the interactional data, I also conducted stimulated recall interviews (SRIs) (Dempsey 2010) with these two participants to better understand what was going on in the recordings from their points of view. During these sessions, I played parts of the audio-recordings back to them and asked them to further explain what was going, what was being said and why they thought these were said. These interviews allowed the participants to elaborate on specific interactions, revealing their perceptions of several different discourses and their implications (Dempsey 2010). Additionally, I conducted semi-structured individual and group interviews with six other young people, where the participants had the opportunity to comment on issues such as their attendance in the school, reasons for attending the complementary school, learning experiences, their take on the activities which were going on in the school and so on. Finally, interviews with four teachers and two parents were carried out, which will be referred to here for triangulation purposes.

Since the aim of the current paper is to understand how young people perceive different varieties of Turkish that they are exposed to in the complementary school setting, I did not scan for specific pre-determined themes in the data. Rather, the analysis was data-driven, where the goal was to identify the emerging themes and discourses through an open coding approach. As Glaser (2016) indicates, ‘Open coding allows the researcher to see the direction in which to take his research so he can become selective and focused conceptually on a particular social problem’ (¶2). Using NVivo 7.0, the emerging themes (Patton 2002) were identified following Miles and Huberman’s (1994) four-step analytical process. These steps included data reduction, where ‘selecting, focusing, simplifying, abstracting and transforming the data that appear in written-up field notes or transcriptions’ (Miles and Huberman 1994, 10) are carried out. For this step, the sections where the participants referred to different varieties of Turkish in the transcripts were highlighted. Using principles of analysis of discourse, where the analysis is focused on ‘local geography of contexts and practices and also to the devices through which discourses are effectively realised’ (Potter et al. 1990, 209), the discursive themes raised by the participants in relation to the two varieties were listed. In this respect, my analysis in this paper, which mainly included the SRI transcripts and the semi-structured interview transcripts, was not discourse analysis per se but was an analysis of discourses. The second step, data display, enables the researcher to ‘assemble organized information into immediately accessible, compact form’ (Miles and Huberman 1994, 11), while the third step, conclusion drawing refers to bringing together tentative conclusions from the previous two steps. For these steps, the themes identified in each extract were tabulated together with extracts from the transcripts where they appeared and recurring ones in several interviews and SRI sessions were identified. Through another reading of the relevant extracts, the discursive themes which seemed to run across different interview transcripts were noted and possible relationships between these were highlighted through memos. Attention was also paid to how different discursive themes, such as ‘proper Turkish’ and social capitals, may relate to each other and possible explanations for these were drawn in the conclusions. Finally, the verification step advocated by Miles and Huberman (1994) requires scrutinising the tentative conclusions drawn previously to be checked against other data. For this final step, ethnographic data, i.e. observational memos and interviews with other participants (particularly parents), were read through to confirm the validity of the emerging discursive themes. The themes that I identified were in the form of discourses through which young people described their perceptions or experiences within the context of the Turkish complementary school that they were attending. Throughout this paper, pseudonyms were used to refer to individual participants.

One of the strongest emerging themes in the analysis of young people’s discourses around their language learning experiences was ‘learning proper Turkish at the Turkish school.’ However, a closer investigation of the discourses through which young people described different varieties of Turkish showed that their understanding of the dominant position of ST is not always a positive one. In the following extracts, I present different accounts by some of my participants to illustrate these points.

# Mobilising capitals: learning proper and elegant Turkish in London

In several interviews, young people pointed out that the reason they attended the Turkish complementary school was to learn ‘proper’ Turkish, which could later be used for getting a job in London, Turkey or northern Cyprus, or for succeeding in standardised exams, such as GCSEs. For instance, Mehmet (11-year-old boy) thought that coming to the Turkish school improved his knowledge of ‘words’ and helped him learn ‘proper Turkish:’

1 Interviewer: so you think you wouldn’t be able to learn Turkish if you didn’t   
2 come to the Turkish school   
3 Mehmet: yeah I know I would learn a little bit but I wouldn’t improve my   
4 Turkish cause my mum would speak Turkish to me not English   
5 she already does and she would be- speak more Turkish to me if I   
6 didn’t know so she could teach us   
7 Interviewer: then what’s the use of the Turkish school?   
8 Mehmet: um to learn the proper standard Turkish

In this extract, Mehmet’s awareness of his mothers’ knowledge of Turkish is apparent. Elsewhere in the interview, he also mentioned that his mother watched Turkish TV, so to be able to understand what is going on in specific programmes and watch together with his family, he believed that he needed Turkish. Hence, his understanding of the reason for learning Turkish is both socially and culturally gauged (Bourdieu 1986). Mehmet points out that his mother does speak to him and his brother in Turkish regularly (line 5). However, he is also aware that his mother’s Turkish, i.e. the Turkish Cypriot variety, is not the ‘proper’ one. While claiming that his mother would be able to teach them Turkish even if they did not come to the Turkish school (lines 3–6), his addition of the words ‘proper’ and ‘standard’ to qualify the Turkish language he learns in the Turkish school (line 8) is significant. This juxtaposition of two different language learning experiences, i.e. mother teaching him a kind of Turkish that is not the ‘proper’ one as opposed to Mehmet learning ‘proper’ Turkish at school, reiterates the discourses of ST being a more ‘educated form’ (Lytra 2012). It signals the level of awareness among young people in relation to language varieties and their rankings.

Throughout the data, it was not difficult to see how young people’s discourses around language learning would cross-cut possible class-related positions. Mehmet’s mother was one of my adult participants in the study, who was a housewife. Mehmet’s father was working as a taxi driver and he was the only provider in the house. Mehmet had an older brother and they were the second generation of Turkish Cypriots living in London in their family. Mehmet’s mother came to London to marry his father, who came earlier to work and settle in the UK, following some of his cousins in his family. Therefore, Mehmet’s parents could be identified as working class. During our interview, Mehmet’s mother mentioned several times that she aspired for both of her sons to attend university in the UK to achieve a better lifestyle than they had at the time. Hence, Mehmet’s reference to learning ‘proper’ Turkish through school education could also be read as echoes of his parents’ aspirations for upward mobility by increasing his cultural capital. Mehmet’s awareness of these distinctions also illustrates how young people perceive learning ST as a way of building capitals, which later they can make use of. Bourdieu (1991) writes that linguistic excellence is characterised in two important ways: (a) distinction and (b) correctness:

Language that is ‘recherché,’ ‘well chosen,’ ‘elevated,’ ‘lofty,’ ‘dignified,’ or ‘distinguished’ contains a negative reference (the very words used to name it shows this) to ‘common’ ‘everyday,’ ‘ordinary,’ ‘spoken,’ ‘colloquial,’ ‘familiar’ language and beyond this, to ‘popular,’ ‘crude,’ ‘coarse,’ ‘vulgar,’ ‘sloppy,’ ‘loose,’ ‘trivial,’ ‘uncouth’ language (not to mention the unspeakable, ‘gibberish,’ ‘pidgin,’ or ‘slang’). The oppositions from which this series is generated, and which, being derived from the legitimate language, is organized from the standpoint of dominant users, can be reduced to two: the opposition between ‘distinguished’ and ‘vulgar’ (or ‘rare’ and ‘common’) and the opposition between ‘tense’ (or ‘sustained’) and ‘relaxed’ (or ‘loose’), which no doubt represents the specifically linguistic version of the first, very general opposition. (Bourdieu 1991, 60).

So rankings of languages in this way bring together the idea of properness they presuppose, as was illustrated in Mehmet’s interview. A similar example emerged in my interview with Berk, another 11- year-old boy:

1 Interviewer: what- what kind of things are you learning here?   
2 Berk: we’re learning like how to read proper Turkish and speak proper Turkish

Similar to Mehmet’s case, Berk’s father was the only parent working in their household. His mother was a housewife and his father worked at a restaurant. According to these boys, who claimed to use Turkish mostly with their parents, they could have learned the language at home but that language would not be the ‘proper Turkish.’ A third participant, Ali (11-year old boy) responded to my question about coming to the Turkish school in almost an identical way:

1 Interviewer: So emm I wonder why you come to the Turkish school?   
2 Ali: emm well I am comin’ so then get like speak proper Turkish so like so then I can   
3 read like kind of fluent   
4 Interviewer: hmhm   
5 Ali: so like when I look at here [pointing at the paper in his hand] I can just read it   
6 and because like my mum wants me to come here do my GCSEs and A Levels

Ali’s responses to the question of why he was coming to the Turkish school also included discourses of cultural capital: being able to speak proper Turkish (line 2), which will later help him achieve good grades in his GCSE and A-level exams (line 6). Even though he highlights that doing the GCSEs is his mother’s wish, he also identifies these exams as important for his future education later in the interview. Ali also mentioned during the interview that his cousins from Cyprus had taught him some words in Turkish, ‘swear words mostly’ but knowing those did not mean that he was fluent in Turkish. Drawing on a discourse of fluency, Ali distances himself from the lower level Turkish that his cousins have taught him and aspires to learn proper Turkish and ‘when I look at here I can just read it’ effortlessly (line 5).

Considering that all of the parents of my participants were from Turkish Cypriot backgrounds, what they referred to as ‘proper Turkish’ was the standard version, as opposed to the Turkish Cypriot variety they experienced on an everyday basis at home. While these statements signal the awareness among young people of the standard language ideologies operating within the school setting (Çavuşoğlu 2019), they also show that young people recognise the existence of more than one form of Turkish language and also recognise that the school is there to teach them the ‘proper’ version, i.e. ST. Hence, their conceptions of Turkish language refer to the refined legitimised version that, as Bourdieu (1991) argues, is imposed on the dominated group via oppositions such as ‘proper’ and ‘not proper.’ In Bourdieu’s (1973, 1991) conceptualisation, this imposition has class implications where the ‘not proper’ version is usually associated with the working class speakers, whereas users of the legitimate language are perceived as belonging to the middle and upper classes, i.e. the elite. Even though references to class were not explicit in my interviews with young people, when the ethnographic data is also considered, it is not difficult to see that their families’ working class status may have impacted young people’s discourses around different varieties of Turkish as cultural capital. As Çavuşoğlu (2014) has also indicated, young people in Turkish complementary schools are aware of the social and cultural capitals they are gaining by studying ‘proper’ Turkish, especially in terms of helping them ‘earn qualifications for their knowledge of Turkish language and culture’ (6). She quotes several participants in her study, where young people talk about taking the GCSE exams in Turkish language to help them earn points for entering good universities as well as possibly helping them find a job later.

The possibility of capitalising on their knowledge of ST was not only on the agenda of young people who were born and brought up in the UK. Another of my young participants, Emine (12- year-old girl) also argued that people in Turkey probably spoke the ‘right’ way. Emine’s family had migrated to the UK from Cyprus approximately eight months prior to the time of the study. Her father had a chronic illness and needed constant care and her mother did not work. Part of the reason for their migration to the UK was her father’s illness but she also explained that the other reason for their move was that there were good schools in the UK; her parents believed that she and her sister could get a better education here. In one of our interviews, Emine mentioned that she was studying for her Turkish GCSE exam because ‘they said when you get your GCSE you can get a job even if you don’t go to university, you still get a job with your GCSE.’ Hence, the knowledge of the Turkish language and certification of this with an exam would add to her cultural capital initially and economic capital later on. Since she had recently arrived in the UK from Cyprus, Emine’s Turkish was strongly Cypriot. She was also aware of the distinction between Turkish spoken in Cyprus and the variety spoken in Turkey. When I asked her if she realised that Turkish people and Turkish Cypriots spoke a bit differently, she first said: ‘Cypriots speak Turkish like black people speak English here.’ When I asked her to elaborate, her response was:

1 Emine: I mean .. it is not the correct [way] but they speak like that   
2 Interviewer: is it wrong? I mean Tur- Cypriots’ way or?   
3 Emine: well mostly because like .. umm .. the pronunciation of words it’s   
4 like they speak more elegantly there they always say they speak   
5 correct Turkish over there   
6 Interviewer: whe- in Cyprus?   
7 Emine: in Turkey (clears her throat) I really don’t know actually because   
8 I probably speak like that because I am a Cypriot

Here, Emine’s reference to the black English vernacular is important since it presents her perception of the different varieties of languages belonging to different groups. She also has an understanding of the different versions of Turkish language and the categorisations of these versions as ‘elegant’ or ‘correct’ as opposed to ‘not elegant’ and ‘not correct.’ Distancing herself from this elegance, she also acknowledges that she would not know how correct the language spoken in Turkey would be because she categorises herself as a ‘Cypriot’ who speaks the ‘not elegant’ and ‘not correct’ version. Emine not only identifies the varieties spoken by people from different ethnic backgrounds but she also refers to geographically different places; ‘they speak more elegantly there’ (line 4) as opposed to the language used on the island where she is from. In her study of parents’ perceptions of Turkish complementary schools, Lytra (2012) also refers to a similar act of boundary drawing around linguistic practices by her participants. While Cypriot Turkish is appropriate for use among family members and friends, it is not appropriate to communicate with people from Turkey since it is not ‘proper’ (Lytra 2012). It is important to point out here that since Turkish was Emine’s first language and she had studied ST at school in Cyprus too, she felt quite bored at the Turkish complementary school and she often reiterated that she did not learn much there. Thus, her position was quite different from the other students who were born and brought up in the UK, learning ST only at the Turkish complementary school. Despite this competence, Emine’s account of how she is not a member of the elegantly speaking Turkish people is a vivid example of how the legitimisation of a specific variety at the expense of others makes the users of that variety feel. In other words, her discourses around language varieties not only imply the prevalence of standard language ideologies within this context but also how young people position speakers of different varieties based on their language abilities (Çavuşoğlu 2019).

# An alternative discourse: learning posh and weird Turkish

The final example of how young people made references to standard and Cypriot Turkish varieties when talking about their language learning experiences in the Turkish school comes from a 12-year old young girl, Sena. Following an observation in her class, where her teacher kept correcting her use of Turkish, claiming that her version was ‘incorrect’ and ‘made up,’ Sena told me that she thought ST sounded ‘posh’ and ‘weird’ according to her. She claimed that she never used such ‘posh’ words, referring to the grammatical correction suggested by her teacher during the class session. Çavuşoğlu (2019) argues that such contestations of standard language ideologies within the classroom context indicate the complex nature of language learning from the perspective of young people in complementary schools. Examples of how Cypriot Turkish is positioned as the inferior variety by the adults in Turkish complementary schools are presented by Lytra (2012) and Çavuşoğlu (2019) in their earlier studies. Çavuşoğlu (2010, 2013) also presented the ways in which young people at times complied with and at other times resisted such attitudes, discourses and language teaching practices within the classroom context in various ways.

Besides the fact that Sena has chosen the word ‘posh’ to refer to the standard version, what made this interview interesting was that Sena herself was from an affluent family. Her case was quite different from my other young participants. Both of her parents were born in the UK and were working as solicitors. She explained to me earlier in the interview that her parents use ST all the time when communicating with their clients. They had a very big house and she had a childminder to take care of her on a daily basis. Even though there were students from various socioeconomic backgrounds in the Turkish school, Sena was the only participant in the study who came from such an affluent background. Yet, she still called ST ‘posh’ and her language, Cypriot Turkish, not posh. She repeated that she would never use the version suggested by her teacher because it feels ‘weird.’ During my interview with Emine, when I asked her which variety of Turkish she would prefer, she said:

1 Emine: I don’t like it [ST] … they say that it is the correct way [of speaking]   
2 but I would not know because I speak like Cypriots probably … I have a   
3 Turkish friend and we get along but when I go to Turkey, I speak the   
4 same way [Cypriot Turkish] but they speak differently and I don’t like it

Emine’s discourses in this extract indicate that she clearly distinguishes between the way that the two varieties are spoken and she openly expresses a dislike towards ST (line 4). When I further probed into the reasons of her dislike, she said that it sounded ‘weird’ to her. Even though speakers of ST are perceived as possessing a degree of sophistication that does not exist in speakers of Cypriot Turkish, Sena’s and Emine’s discourses in relation to the two varieties of Turkish indicate strong links to Lytra’s (2012) descriptions of how Turkish Cypriots perceived other Turkish Cypriots as performing a ‘negative persona’ when they spoke ST. In this respect, speakers of ST are iconicized as ‘posh’ by Sena or ‘elegant’ by the other young people in my study as well but this sophistication in language use is not always a desirable one, as was the case for these participants. Young people’s language attitudes and their understanding of ST and Cypriot Turkish on an axis of ‘us’ and ‘them’ also indicate that the otherwise assumed positions of the varieties within the community are much more fluid and in flux (Çavuşoğlu 2010). While the context of the Turkish complementary schools appear to stimulate dominant standard language ideologies and discourses around capitalisation on the standard varieties, young people seem to recognise and sometimes follow, but at the same time disturb these ideologies and provide alternative discourses when talking about different varieties of Turkish in this context.

# Conclusion

In the current study, I investigated the discourses through which young people from Turkish Cypriot backgrounds talk about their language learning experiences in Turkish complementary schools in the UK. Using an emergent thematic analysis of interviews, I found that young people were significantly aware of the continuum along which varieties of the Turkish language are positioned with respect to properness. Not surprisingly, in a setting where language learning and teaching practices were strongly informed by standard language ideologies (Çavuşoğlu 2014), most of my participants identified ST as the ‘proper’ version. They also reiterated that the variety that they and their parents used, i.e. Cypriot Turkish, was not proper and educated. Woven with discourses of language as a capital, they talked about how learning ST would help them achieve better results in education (Çavuşoğlu 2014). They were aware that learning ST would mean they would sound ‘educated’ (Lytra 2012). Yet, interestingly, they drew boundaries around ‘us’ and ‘them’ when it came to identifying with a specific variety of Turkish. Sena’s case specifically shows how perceptions of language varieties can be complicated by young people from Turkish Cypriot backgrounds, and how they may do so by discursively positioning themselves away from the ‘posh’ version of Turkish. On the other hand, Emine’s awareness of the cultural capital value of ST is juxtaposed against her dislike of the same variety. Therefore, young people’s perceptions of the varieties of Turkish in this context cannot be said to be uniform and their discourses around ST do not always position it as a desirable variety despite being positioned as the proper one.

The analysis of discourses presented here points us to a direction to look at complementary schools not only as places where heritage language learning happens seamlessly, but as contexts that are multilingual and superdiverse (Blommaert and Varis 2011; Vertovec 2007). At the ground level, these schools bring together young people from a variety of linguistic backgrounds. Young people’s awareness of specific discourses of standard language ideologies rooted in properness means that they can at times accept and use these discourses, while at other times, they can identify with a different variety of the language, resisting and even disturbing our understanding of crosscuttings between language varieties and our perceptions of their speakers. In this respect, referring to varieties of English spoken by working class students in the mainstream schools in the UK, Snell (2013) argues that

it is not the presence or absence of non-standard forms in children’s speech that raises educational issues; rather, educational responses which problematise non-standard voices risk marginalising working-class speech, and may contribute to the alienation of working-class children, or significant groups of them, within the school system.

Similarly, since young people identify ‘their’ language variety with a rather ‘uneducated’ form of Turkish in this case, marginalisation on their part is likely in a setting that is supposed to be a ‘safe space’ to perform multilingualism (Creese et al. 2006; Martin, Creese, and Bhatt 2003). Rather than following a traditional approach and understanding of language learning and teaching in these contexts, the multi-nature of cultural and linguistic experiences which young people bring to the school setting should be recognised. As Ioannidou et al. (2020) have also argued, such a recognition would help young people feel empowered and therefore (multi-) language maintenance can be promoted.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the author(s).

# Funding

This work was supported by Economic and Social Research Council [grant number Quota Award].

# Notes on contributor

Assoc. Prof. Çise Çavuşoğlu, a Fulbright FLTA alumna and an ESRC Quota award receiver, is currently the Chairperson of the Department of ELT at Near East University and also the Director of the Education Unit at the same university. Her research interests include the relationship between ethnicity, culture, everyday language use and the way language is utilised for different sociological and educational purposes within multicultural and multilingual settings.

# ORCID

Çise Çavuşoğlu $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-0832-7142

# References

Archer, L., and B. Francis. 2006. “Challenging Classes? Exploring the Role of Social Class Within the Identities and Achievement of British Chinese Pupils.” Sociology 40 (1): 29–49.   
Blommaert, J., and B. Rampton. 2011. “Language and Superdiversity: A Position Paper (Paper no: 70) [Electronic Version].” Working Paper in Urban Language and Literacies. Accessed June 30, 2013. http://www.kcl.ac.uk/ innovation/groups/ldc/publications/workingpapers/70.pdf.   
Blommaert, J., and P. Varis. 2011. “Enough is Enough: The Heuristics of Authenticity in Superdiversity.” Tilburg Papers in Culture Studies. Paper No: 2.   
Bourdieu, P. 1973. “Cultural Reproduction and Social Reproduction.” In Papers in the Sociology of Education: Knowledge, Education and Cultural Change, edited by R. Brown, 71–112. London: Tavistock Publications.   
Bourdieu, P. 1986. “Forms of Capital.” In Handbook of Theory of Research for the Sociology of Education, edited by J. E. Richardson, 46–58. New York, NY: Greenword Press.   
Bourdieu, P. 1991. Language and Symbolic Power. Cambridge: Polity Press.   
Bourdieu, P., and J. Passeron. 1977. Reproduction in Education, Society, and Culture. London: Sage.   
Çavuşoğlu, Ç. 2010. “‘The Trouble with Turkishness’?: (Invisible) Turkish Cypriots in a Turkish School in London.” Unpublished PhD diss., King’s College London.   
Çavuşoğlu, Ç. 2013. “Complementary Schools as “Safe Spaces” to Practice Hybridity? Language Power and Resistance.” Working Papers in Urban Language and Literacies. Peper No. 109. http://www.kcl.ac.uk/innovation/ groups/ldc/publications/workingpapers/the-papers/WP109-C?avus?og?lu-2013-Are-complementary-schools-safespaces.pdf.   
Çavuşoğlu, Ç. 2014. “Functions of Turkish Complementary Schools in the UK: Official vs. Insider Discourses.” South African Journal of Education 34 (3): 1–8.   
Çavuşoğlu, Ç. 2019. “Standard Language Ideologies: The Case of Cypriot Turkish in Turkish Schools in London.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, doi:10.1080/01434632.2019.1687711.   
Cook, M., and J. Simpson. 2012. “Discourses About Linguistic Diversity.” In The Routledge Handbook of Multilingualism, edited by M. Martin-Jones, A. Blackledge, and A. Creese, 116–130. London: Routledge.   
Creese, A., A. Bhatt, N. Bhojani, and P. Martin. 2006. “Multicultural, Heritage and Learner Identities in Complementary Schools.” Language and Education 20 (1): 23–43.   
Dempsey, N. P. 2010. “Stimulated Recall Interviews in Ethnography.” Qualitative Sociology 33 (3): 349–367. doi:10.1007/ s11133-010-9157-x.   
Evripidou, D., and Ç Çavuşoğlu. 2015. “Turkish Cypriots’ Language Attitudes: The Case of Cypriot Turkish and Standard Turkish in Cyprus.” Mediterranean Language Review 22: 119–138.   
Francis, B., L. Archer, and A. Mau. 2009. “Language as Capital, or Language as Identity? Chinese Complementary School Pupils’ Perspectives on the Purposes and Benefits of Complementary Schools.” British Educational Research Journal 35 (4): 519–538.   
Gal, S., and J. Irvine. 1995. “The Boundaries of Languages and Disciplines: How Ideologies Construct Difference.” Social Research 62: 967–1001.   
Glaser, B. G. 2016. “Open Coding Descriptions.” Grounded Theory Review: An International Journal 2 (15). http:// groundedtheoryreview.com/2016/12/19/open-coding-descriptions/.   
Hadjioannou, X., S. Tsiplakou, and M. Kappler. 2011. “Language Policy and Language Planning in Cyprus.” Current Issues in Language Planning, 1–67. doi:10.1080/14664208.2011.629113.   
Huang, J. 2020. “A Shifting Standard: A Stratified Ideological Ecology in a Birmingham Chinese Complementary School.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, doi:10.1080/01434632.2020.1715991.   
Ioannidou, E. 2004. “On Language and Ethnic Identity among Greek Cypriot Students.” The Cyprus Review 16 (1): 29–52.   
Ioannidou, E. 2009. “Using the ‘Improper’ Language in the Classroom: The Conflict Between Language use and Legitimate Varieties in Education. Evidence from a Greek Cypriot Classroom.” Language and Education 23 (3): 263–278.   
Ioannidou, E. 2012. “Language Policy in Greek Cypriot Education: Tensions Between National and Pedagogical Values.” Language, Culture and Curriculum 25 (3): 215–230.   
Ioannidou, E., P. Karatsareas, V. Lytra, and S. Tsiplakou. 2020. “Why and How to Integrate Non-standard Linguistic Varieties into Education: Cypriot Greek in Cyprus and the UK (Policy Papers).” Languages, Society & Policy. doi:10. 17863/CAM.54137.   
Ioannidou, E., and A. Sophocleous. 2010. “‘Now, is This How We are Going to Say It?’ Comparing Teachers’ Language Practices in Primary and Secondary State Education in Cyprus.” Linguistics and Education 21 (4): 298–313.   
Irvine, J. T., and S. Gal. 2000. “Language Ideology and Linguistic Differentiation.” In Regimes of Language: Ideologies, Politics and Identities, edited by P. V. Krosktrity, 35–84. Santa Fe, NM: School of American Research.   
İssa, T. 2006. “An Ethnographic Case Study of Code Switching and Language Choice: The Uses of Cypriot Turkish in London.” International Journal of Sociology of Language 181: 83–106.   
Karatsareas, P. 2018. “Attitudes Towards Cypriot Greek and Standard Modern Greek in London’s Greek Cypriot Community.” International Journal of Bilingualism 22 (4): 412–428. doi:10.1177/1367006918762158.   
Karatsareas, P. 2020. “From Village Talk to Slang: The Re-enregisterment of a Non-standardised Variety in an Urban Diaspora.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, doi:10.1080/01434632.2020.1767115.   
Lytra, V. 2012. “Discursive Constructions of Language and Identity: Parents’ Competing Perspectives in London Turkish Complementary Schools.” Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 33 (1): 85–100. doi:10.1080/ 01434632.2011.638076.   
Lytra, V., and T. Baraç. 2008. “Multilingual Practices and Identity Negotiations among Turkish-Speaking Young People in a Diasporic Context.” In Youngspeak in a Multilingual Perspective, edited by A.-B. Stenström, and A. M. Jørgensen, 55– 78. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Martin, P., A. Creese, and A. Bhatt. 2003. Complementary Schools and their Communities in Leicester: Final Report to the ESRC. Leicester: University of Leicester.   
Miles, M. B., and A. M. Huberman. 1994. Qualitative Data Analysis. 2nd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Nash, R. 1990. “Bourdieu on Education and Social and Cultural Reproduction.” British Journal of Sociology of Education 11 (4): 431–447.   
Osam, N. 2004. “Kıbrıs Ağzında Dilsel Tutum Saptaması: Olgu çalışması.” [Language Attitudes in Turkish Cypriot Dialect: A Case Study]. In Current Research in Turkish Linguistics, edited by K. İmer, and G. Doğan, 207–219. Gazimağusa: Eastern Mediterranean University Press.   
Patton, M. Q. 2002. Qualitative Research and Evaluation Methods. 3rd ed. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Pehlivan, A., and İ Menteşoğlu. 2007. “The Attitudes of Turkish Cypriot Teachers Towards the Dialects use in North Cyprus Primary Education.” Proceedings of the 6th IAIMTE conference, University of Exeter. https://l1.publicationarchive.com/download/2/3568.   
Potter, J., M. Wetherell, R. Gill, and D. Edwards. 1990. “Discrouse: Noun, Verb or Social Practice?” Philosophical Psychology 3 (2): 205–217.   
Saraçoğlu, E. 2004. Kıbrıs Ağzı [Cypriot Dialect]. Lefkoşa: Ateş Matbaası.   
Skeggs, B. 1997. Formations of Class & Gender. London: Sage.   
Snell, J. 2013. “Dialect, Interaction and Class Positioning at School: From Deficit to Difference Repertoire.” Language and Education 27 (2): 110–128.   
Sonyel, N. 2005. Turkish Language, Culture and Education Consortium of UK Business Plan 2005–2010. London: Turkish Language, Culture and Education Consortium of UK.   
Tegegne, W. 2015. “The Use of Dialects in Education and its Impacts on Students’ Learning and Achievements.” Education Journal 4 (5): 263–269.   
Tegegne, W. 2016. “The Attitude of Teachers Towards Varieties of a Language and its Effects on Learners’ Education and Self-Esteem.” Journal of Literature, Language and Linguistics 18: 93–97.   
Tsiplakou, S. 2007. “Linguistic Variation in the Cypriot Language Classroom and its Implications for Education.” In Sociolinguistic and Pedagogical Dimensions of Dialects in Education, edited by A. Papapavlou, and P. Pavlou, 236– 264. Newcastle-upon-Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.   
Tsiplakou, S. 2011. “Linguistic Attitudes and Emerging Hyperdialectism in a Diaglossic Setting: Young Cypriot Greeks on their Language.” Berkeley Linguistic Society, 29 [Special Volume: Minority and diasporic languages of Europe], 120– 132. Berkeley, CA: Berkeley Linguistics Society.   
Vertovec, S. 2007. “Super-diversity and its Implications.” Ethnic and Racial Studies 30 (6): 1024–1054.   
Wei, L. 2011. “Multilinguality, Multimodality, and Multicompetence: Code- and Modeswitching by Minority Ethnic Children in Complementary Schools.” The Modern Language Journal 95 (iii): 370–384. doi:10.1111/j.1540-4781. 2011.01209.