# The coordinate structures in a corpus of New Age talks: “man and woman”/ “woman and man”

GÜLS¸EN MUSAYEVA VEFALI and FULYA ERDENTUG˘

# Abstract

In this article we explore language in a specialized corpus of genderrelated talks by Osho, one of the founders of the New Age postmodern movements. Specifically, we examine the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” which, unlike the gendered lexical items “man”/“woman”, have not received attention in the previous language and gender studies. For our research purposes, we adapt a new methodological framework (Baker et al. 2008) integrating corpus analysis and qualitative analysis. The qualitative analysis of the corpus evidence (  frequency, collocates, and concordances) in relation to gender construal in the specialized corpus seems to indicate a newly emerging semantic profile of the coordinate structures with “man” and “woman”, as well as a new, holistic gender identity which is in line with the holistic views of the New Age and Osho movement.

Keywords: man and woman; woman and man; corpus evidence; gender; New Age; Osho.

# 1.	 Introduction

In this article we explore language in relation to gender in talks by Osho, the founder of one of the New Age postmodern movements and one of the “New Age cults” (Drobin 1999: 231). For this purpose, we construct a specialized corpus of gender-related talks which were compiled and published as The Book of Woman and The Book of Man in the name of Osho in the early 2000s. Specifically, we examine the corpus evidence on the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” which, to the best of our knowledge, have not been explored by the previous studies. Our aim is to investigate the evidence on these coordinate structures (frequency, collocations, concordances) in relation to gender construal in the corpus of Osho’s talks.

In the past decades language and gender have been examined extensively in quantitative and qualitative studies (Holmes 1991) as well as in a growing body of corpus studies, mostly on pairs of the gendered items “man/woman,” gendered pronouns, and gender marking (Kjellmer 1986; Stubbs 1992; CaldasCoulthard et al. 2010; Hunston 2002; Sotillo and Starace-Nastasi 1999; Romaine 2000; Baranowski 2002; Holmes and Sigley 2002). It is maintained that in English gender is constructed, constrained, and molded through various language patterns which “reflect strong societal attitudes to gender roles. Ideological influence is here very overt, and in these cases there is no neutral or unmarked choice” (Sigley and Holmes 2002: 138–139).

Recently, the collocational behavior of the lexical items “man”, “woman”, “boy”, and “girl” is examined across four components of the Cobuild online corpus, and it is concluded that “socio-culturally salient concepts encoded in potentially symmetric terms may develop different ideological significance when they recurrently keep company with different sets of words” (Gesuato 2003: 262). The representation of gender in the British National Corpus (BNC) is explored in terms of the domains of power and deviance, social categories, personality and mental capacity, appearance, sexuality, and the collocation evidence for “man” and “woman” suggests gender stereotype (Pearce 2008). In this regard, it is believed that “though gender distinctions may be constructed and in important senses ‘arbitrary’, they have a hold over us and are difficult, perhaps impossible to transcend” (Frosh 1994: 41).

However, there have been some changes in views of gender and related language emphasizing a shift in the paradigm from the gender binary difference to a new postmodern paradigm “concerned with the diversity of gendered . . identities” (Cameron 2005: 482). In this regard, we assume that this paradigm shift has been reflected in the gender-related postmodern New Age talks by Osho. It is noteworthy that most recent published research on ideologies, which as representations of aspects of the world can contribute to changing social relations (Fairclough 2005: 9), has used specialized corpora (McEnery et al. 2006: 111). In the present article, therefore, we exploit a specialized corpus of the Osho’s gender-related talks to investigate the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” in relation to gender construal.

# 2.	 Methodology

We construct the specialized corpus from www.osho.com, 53 talks (181,594 words) comprising The Book of Woman, and 80 talks (279,744 words) comprising The Book of Man. The corpus size, two sub-corpora comprising 133 talks by Osho (461,338 words), is considered to be optimal for our research purposes. The corpus is processed by Frequency and Concordance techniques;1 it also employs AntConc software.2 The corpus methodology of search and processing techniques of frequency words, collocational patterns, and concordance lines in their context, comprising co-text (a short span of several words within a single text) as well as inter-text (multiple occurrences of similar patterns across independent texts), provides observational evidence of meaning, the slogan being “meaning is use” (Stubbs 2001: 157).

Corpora are regarded as social artifacts revealing regularities underlying “patterned preferences for modes of expression of language users in given contexts” (McCarthy 2001: 63). Therefore, we exploit the corpus evidence on the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” to transform an introspective interpretation into an empirical endeavor. Further, in order to “make reliable statements” (Mautner 1995: 22–23) about the specialized corpus, we also compare our corpus evidence with two general corpora, the British National Corpus (BNC) and the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA).3 The BNC comprises 100 million words in five genres, whereas the COCA includes more than 385 million words of text, equally distributed across six genres.

For our research purposes, we adapt a novel triangulating methodological framework proposed by Baker et al. (2008: 295). We initiate the study with examination of the social context, specifically views on gender in the New Age and Osho movements. We proceed with corpus analysis of the frequency, collocation, and KWIC (key word in context) concordance evidence related to the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man”, as well as comparison of the pertinent corpus evidence with the general corpora. After identifying potential sites of interest in the corpus we conduct a qualitative analysis of the expanded concordance evidence (  beyond the span of five words) on the coordinate structures in relation to gender construal in the specialized corpus of Osho’s talks.

# 3. Context

Initially, we examine the social context of the Osho’s New Age postmodern religious movement. New Age is an umbrella term that refers to “a vast array of groups, communities and networks” which aims at “the transformation of human consciousness” (Clarke 2006: 26). Postmodernism is associated with embracing diversity, pluralism, difference, cultural relativity, with a desire to deconstruct and oppose universal truths and binary oppositions of Western thought that have led to the formation and oppression of the other, the different, in terms of class, race, ethnicity, gender, and sexual preference (Bauman 1994). The existence of postmodern elements in all New Age religions which criti cize “dualistic and reductionistic tendencies in (modern) western culture”

(Hanegraaff 2000) is admitted by the authors that consider it postmodern (Lyon 1993; Urban 1996; Ivakhiv 2003), as well as by those who relate the New Age religions to modernity due to its meta-narrative construction (Heelas 1993; Berg 2008). In New Age religions, dualism, on almost all fronts — the spiritual and the material, the mind and the body, male and female — are rejected or diminished in scope and significance (Dawson 1998). The proliferating New Age religions, therefore, provide a holistic sense of self, in theory and practice, that transcends the conventions and norms of modern mass society (Hanegraaff 2000; Askehave 2004; Flere and Kırbıs 2009).

However, since the majority of new religious movements are the revitalization of old religions, the research to date does not indicate a “significant change in gender roles” in these movements (Puttick 2003: 230). Most Western- and Eastern-oriented new religious movements promote traditional, patriarchal gender roles allocating “greater social and economic power to men” (Aidala 1985: 297) and confining women’s roles primarily to domesticity and reproduction. Thus they promote a female ideal, submissive to either a male master or a husband (Jacobs 1991).

It has been argued that the Eastern new religious groups accept a conser vative gender ideology and may exploit and control their female members (Jacobs 1984) or, conversely, that these groups share a pro-female ideology liberating women (Palmer 1993; Puttick 1997). In this regard, it has been demonstrated that both factors are somewhat in the cause–effect relation, in that “these groups empower women because of their emphasis on traditional femininity and because of the domination of extremely powerful (male) leaders who tend to maintain tight control over interpersonal relations” (Fuller and Martin 2003: 354).

Of the Eastern new religious movements the Osho movement is considered “the best-known and most fashionable new religion of the 1970s” (Partridge 2004: 191). Osho or Rajneesh Chandra Mohan Jain was born in India in 1931, and became known as a philosophy professor, a sex guru, and a spiritual teacher. His radical teachings, and the new meditation and therapy techniques introduced to visitors in the permissive climate of the ashrams founded in India and Oregon, attracted spiritual seekers internationally. Nowadays, the total annual sales of Osho’s books in different languages has increased, suggesting that his ideology still attracts a considerable number of readers from all over the world (D’Andrea 2007).

Osho’s teachings based on Eastern and Western philosophies are regarded as “a kind of ‘postmodern pastiche’” of ideas from various sources (Urban 1996: 169). The main goal of the movement is “to ‘de-program’ individuals so that they may behave without reference to norms (oughts or shoulds)” (Carter 1987: 164). Osho’s radical spirituality is mainly based on Tantrism, “the very essence of the liberated, holistic spirituality that characterizes the New Age as a whole — a spirituality that would no longer repress the human body, sexuality, and the desire for material prosperity but integrate them with the need for spiritual nourishment” (Urban 2000: 270).

Of the new religious movements the Osho movement is the most militantly anti-family. According to Osho, the family is “outdated,” “the most hindering phenomenon for human progress” (Puttick 2003: 239). Liberation, therefore, can be achieved through rejection of grand narratives, past traditions, and transcendence of conventional value constraints (Urban 1996: 169). For Osho, valorization of woman who proves “to be the perfect disciple,” as well as emasculation of male disciples is important (Puttick 1997: 76; Fuller and Martin 2003), and in Rajneeshpuram self-esteem among the members is correlated with femininity (Latkin 1989: 634–642).

# 4.	 Corpus analysis

Following examination of the relevant social context we proceed with corpus analysis.

# 4.1.	 Frequency evidence

The frequency search for all instances of the coordinate structures with “woman” and “man” (singular/plural form), with optional articles, and a coordinating conjunction (and/or) identifies 127 occurrences of the structures with “man” first in order of mention, specifically 67 citations of “(a/the) man and woman”, 44 citations of “men and women”, 14 citations of “(a/the) man or woman”, 2 citations of “men or women.” As regards the structures with “woman” first in order of mention, the frequency search reveals fewer, 28 instances, specifically 9 citations of “(a/the) woman and man”, 14 citations of “(a/the) woman or man,” and 5 citations of “women and men”.

# 4.2.	 Collocation evidence

A list of the lexical collocates — words frequently occurring in close proximity (Baker 2006: 96) to the node — the structures “woman and man”, “man and woman” (  based on words within a $+ 5$ to $^ { - 5 }$ span) is obtained through application of AntConc. Frequency is crucial for detecting recurrent patterns and making general claims about the corpus. However, statistical significance should also take account of semantically relevant lexical items (Teubert 2005: 5). The function words, therefore, are filtered out from the collocate list. Considering the specialized corpus size, only those lexical collocates of the structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” that occur in two sub-corpora totally three and more times qualify for inclusion into the list (see Table 1).

Table 1. Lexical collocates in the specialized corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Coordinate structure</td><td>Lexical collocates</td></tr><tr><td>(a/the) man and/or woman men and/or women</td><td>become, come, conflict, create (-s,-ed), differ (-ence, -ent), divide (-ed, -ing), equal (-ity), life, meditate (-ion),.</td></tr><tr><td>a/the woman and/or man</td><td>meet (-ing), real, together (-ness), try (-ing, -ed), world love, making love.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3.	 KWIC ( key word in context) evidence

Further, we manipulate the corpus data through AntConc to derive the pertinent KWIC concordances. Manual scanning of the concordance evidence gives us an impression of the contexts in which the coordinate structures appear in the specialized corpus. A first impression is that in some concordances the structures with “man” first in order of mention are used stereotypically, maintaining the gender binary as illustrated below:

(1)	 differ(-ence, -ent) . . rejudice makes it almost impossible to understand. First thing: man and woman differ basically; they not only differ, they are opposites. That   
(2) equal(-ity) . your minds. Their nonsense is that they are trying to prove that men and women are equal. They are not — and when I say they are not, I don’t m .   
(3) divide(-ed) . . the rich and the poor. I see society divided into two classes, man and woman. Man has remained the master for centuries, and woman the slave

The evidence above seems to emphasize the difference between two genders, their inequality, and the division of the society into two classes.

Another observation, however, is that most of the evidence does not imply the traditional stereotype and is somewhat contradictory compared with the preliminary evidence:

(4)	 differ (-ence, -ent) . . being. Everybody is both. The difference between a man and a woman is not much; the difference is only of degree, qu .   
(5) equal . e is no more interested in her womb. And that womb is there. And men and women are not equal, because man is missing that womb. How can they be . .

Further, the concordances below suggest challenge to the gender binary and the institution of marriage:

(6)	 become/life . . hings new, fresh. The day marriage disappears, the life of both men and women will become healthier — and certainly longer than you can even i . .   
(7) divide(-ing  ) . . s failed to do. Why always go on putting dividing lines between man and woman? The truth is that every man carries a woman within him, and eve .

Moreover, abundant evidence seems to propose amelioration of gender relation:

(8) become . We can learn a lesson from the past, and the only lesson is that man and woman have to become more understanding of each other and more accepti . (9) conflict . . . ict, continuous conflict between the head and the heart, between the man and the woman. This conflict can be dissolved only if the head drops its think . . .   
(10) meditate(-ion) . . rstand me better, naturally you meditate deeper. Man and woman can help each other tremendously towards meditate . .   
(11) meet . . everybody has both, because you are born out of the meeting of a man and woman; your father has contributed, your mother has contributed. You a . .   
(12) together . nd there is no need of any conflict between you, because you are man and woman together, simultaneously. Rather than creating a conflict, my w . .

The manual scanning of the pertinent concordances for the structures with “woman” first in order of mention provides some evidence suggesting an emphasis on love in gender relation:

(13) love . . feel love for me. Only then can our life become a completion.” A woman and a man in love can move into meditation very easily. Meditation and lov . .

(14)	 make love . . has to be created with great sensitivity. When you make love to a woman or a man, make it a great celebration, and each time bring some new creat . .

Interestingly, the scanning of the evidence reveals both coordinate structures, “man and woman” and “woman and man”, co-occurring in the same co-text, as well as a novel coordinate structure “man and woman and man”:

(15)	 . . . the inner circle, because inside you also you are man and woman, woman and man. Nobody is just man and nobody is . . . woman, you have become a man. You will be man and woman and man. When these gaps are felt you can feel that you h

Yet another concordance appears in both sub-corpora, with a coordinating construction incorporating both “women” and “men,” collocating with “unique”:

(16)  . . . inferior. I mean that they are unique. Women are women and men are men; There is no question of comparison. Equ . .

The KWIC concordance evidence presented above suggests a somewhat different view on gender and it is also assumed worth investigating since “even the relatively narrow environment of a single concordance line can point to larger-scale discursive processes” (Mautner 1995: 110).

# 5. Comparison of the specialized corpus evidence with the general corpora

In order to make reliable observations, we subsequently compare the specialized corpus evidence with two general corpora. Our frequency data are mostly consistent with the frequency data from the BNC and the COCA (see Table 2) in that the coordinate structures with “man” first in order of mention are by far the most frequent in both general corpora.

The other structures, with “woman” first in order of mention, except for “(the) women and (the) men,” exhibit a lower frequency in the BNC and the COCA, as well as in the specialized corpus. Comparison of the frequency evidence from two general corpora and the specialized corpus, therefore, indicates that the coordinate structure “man and woman,” with “man” first in order of mention, is still dominant and seemingly stereotypical. However, considering the size of the BNC and COCA, and the relatively fewer citations of the structures with “woman” first in order of mention in the general corpora, 28 instances of these coordinate structures in the specialized corpus warrant our attention.

Table 2. Comparison of the specialized corpus with the general corpora   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Coordinate structures</td><td>BNC 100 million w-s Frequency</td><td>COCA 385 million w-s Frequency</td><td>Specialized corpus 181,594 w-s Frequency</td></tr><tr><td>(the) men and (the) women</td><td>1,960</td><td>11,317</td><td>44</td></tr><tr><td>(a/the) man and (a/the) woman</td><td>298</td><td>1,427</td><td>67</td></tr><tr><td>(a/the) man or (a/the) woman</td><td>176</td><td>673</td><td>14</td></tr><tr><td>(the) men or (the) women.</td><td>54</td><td>224</td><td>2</td></tr><tr><td>(the) women and (the) men.</td><td>254</td><td>1,360</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>(a/the) woman and (a/the) man</td><td>16</td><td>99</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>women or men</td><td>15</td><td>51</td><td>=</td></tr><tr><td>woman or man</td><td>2</td><td>79</td><td>14</td></tr></table></body></html>

Furthermore, comparison of the lexical collocates (  based on words within a $+ 5$ to $^ { - 5 }$ span) of the coordinate structures with “man” first in order of mention in the specialized corpus with those in the BNC and COCA reveals that the collocates “become”, “come”, “create”, “differ (-ence, -ent)”, “divide”, “equal(-ity)”, “life”, “meet”, “real”, “together”, “try” are common since they occur across various genres in the general corpora. They can, therefore, be considered common collocates constructing the semantic profile of the coordinate structure “man and woman”. However, presences as well as absences in the data are significant (Kress and Van Leeuwen 2001). In this regard, the comparison of the collocation evidence also reveals that some collocates of the coordinate structures in the specialized corpus, “meeting”, “conflict”, “meditation”, “togetherness”, “love” are either absent or rare in the general corpora. For example, the collocate “meeting” is absent in the BNC and appears in a different sense only five times in the COCA; “conflict” is also rare with one and four citations in the BNC and the COCA, respectively. Further, “meditation” appears only once in the BNC, and is absent in the COCA; interestingly, “togetherness” is not present in either general corpus. As regards the coordinate structures with “woman” first in order of mention, the lexical collocate “love” is absent in the BNC and occurs only two times in the COCA.

“The meaning attributes of a node’s collocates can provide a helpful sketch of the meaning function of the node within the particular discourse” (Baker et al. 2008: 278). Therefore, in the specialized corpus, the common collocates “differ”, “difference”, “different”, “divide”, “divided”, “dividing”, as well as the new collocation choices “meditate”, “meditation”, “love”, “togetherness” associated with the structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” suggest both the conservative stereotype and new phenomena. Considering that the concept of language is ideologically loaded (Stubbs 1998 [1996]), the analysis of the pertinent frequency, collocation, and KWIC concordance evidence “reinforces” (Partington 2002) our assumption regarding reflection of the postmodern views on gender in the specialized corpus of New Age talks. In order to demonstrate how our assumption is grounded, we conduct a qualitative analysis of the identified sites of interest in the specialized corpus.

# 6.	 Qualitative analysis

The corpus analysis and comparison with the BNC and COCA provide a “map” of the specialized corpus (Baker et al. 2008: 284), highlighting sites of interest for a subsequent qualitative analysis. The frequency and collocation evidence on the coordinate structures, the manual scanning of the KWIC concordance lines, and comparison with the general corpora direct the qualitative analysis to the pertinent expanded concordances (  beyond the five-word span) derived through Concordance.

Initially, an investigation of the language features in one of the sites of interest reveals that woman is identified with “home” and “womb”:

(17)  Once a woman is no more interested in the home, she is no more interested in her womb. And that womb is there. And men and women are not equal, because man is missing that womb. How can they be equal? I am not saying they are unequal, but I am certainly saying they are not equal. They are so different — how can they be equal? They are polar opposites. They are so different, they cannot be compared in terms of equality or inequality. A woman is a woman, a man is a man. And they should remain man and woman. A woman should remain interested in the home, because once she stops being interested in the home she will stop being interested in the womb, in the child. And then naturally she turns into a lesbian.

The identification with “womb” and “home” is intensified by the parallel constructions “no more interested in”. The two concepts are brought together in the interplay of their meanings, which materializes the traditional image of woman. Epistrophe, the repetition of the intensified “that womb” at the end of the additive sentences, draws attention and secures the emphasis on this imagery. Interestingly, “that womb”, inherent in woman, is presented as the major cause of gender inequality in the somewhat paradoxical argument. Moreover, man and woman are assigned the characteristic of “polar opposites” justifying their difference. The “I” statements within their respective parallel structures, backed up by the intensifier “certainly”, and the parenthetical statements, the rhetorical questions “How can they be equal?”, sustain further attention to the argument. Furthermore, they prepare for the subsequent statements, the asyndeton “A woman is a woman, a man is a man”, and the reiterated “should remain”. These portions are made more conspicuous through the repetition of the parallel constructions with “interested in”, again embedding the imagery “home”–“womb”, and framing the concordance to complete it.

Further, an examination of the language features in another site of in terest reveals an antithesis, “fighting”–“understanding”, embedded within the asyndeton:

(18)  It has not to be decided by fighting, it has to be decided by understanding. Spread more and more understanding. Drop these ideas of being men and women! We are all human beings. To be a man or a woman is just a very superficial thing. Don’t make much fuss about it, it is not anything very important; don’t make it a big deal.

The embedded antithesis makes the second part “it has to be decided by understanding” somewhat independent. The opposition between the two concepts arises out of the context, and it is backed up in the subsequent imperative structure with the reiterated and intensified “more and more understanding”. In another imperative structure, the gender binary, “being men and women”, assumes negative demeaning connotations through the verb “drop” in interaction with the intensifier in “these ideas”. The subsequent description “just a very superficial thing” further consolidates the negative content of the gender difference. The parallel imperative structures in “Don’t make much fuss about it” and “don’t make it a big deal” increase the feeling of presence, secure the emphasis, frame the expanded concordance, and in interaction with the negative evaluative adjective in “it is not anything very important” attach additional negative emotional coloring to the gender difference.

A scrutiny of the language features within the context of the expanded concordance below identifies another antithesis, “zoo”–“natural”:

(19)  He is not going to be part of a zoo, he is going to remain natural. And he is not going to go against life, he is going to flow with life. If man and woman can come to an understanding — which is not difficult at all, which is the simplest thing to do — that we drop being zoo animals, we can gain liberation from the zoo. That’s what is needed — liberation from marriage.

The antithesis within the asyndeton creates the somewhat independent clause “he is going to remain natural”, with “he” being used in the generic function. The contrast is intensified by yet another asyndeton with the antithesis, “to go against life”–“to flow with life”. Subsequently “understanding” appears in close proximity to both man and woman, and it assumes positive connotations through the evaluative adjectives in “which is not difficult at all”, “which is the simplest thing to do”. The introduced concept of “zoo” is further developed and assumes negative connotations through the contributory descriptors “against life” and “zoo animals”. Interestingly, the appeal of “liberation from the zoo” is strongly identified with “liberation from marriage” in the concluding emphatic construction “That’s what is needed . . .”, thus presenting marriage in an unfavorable light.

Furthermore, an examination of the language features across the inter-text reveals a rare collocate of “man and woman”, “meditation”:

(20)	 See the real problem! The real problem has nothing to do with man and woman. The real problem has something to do with meditation and the flowering of meditation in love, in joy, in blissfulness. So there is no possibility of any difference in meditation between man and woman. No. Meditation is concerned with your consciousness — and consciousness is neither man nor woman. This is one of the fundamentals I want the world to be aware of. It is meditation in which the head and heart lose each other, melt into each other. It is meditation in which man and woman melt into each other.

Man and woman can help each other tremendously towards meditation and towards the ultimate transformation of their being.

Repetition of “the real problem” in anadiplosis and anaphora secures cohesion of the first three sentences, and is backed up initially by the imperative structure, and subsequently, by the parallel contrastive constructions “has nothing to do”/“has something to do”. The concept of meditation is thus introduced and highlighted by the positively connoted attribute “flowering”, and enumeration “in love, in joy, in blissfulness”. Further, in the seemingly universal appeal, “This is one of the fundamentals I want the world to be aware of ”, meditation “concerned with consciousness”, which is “neither man nor woman”, is construed as an asexual phenomenon. The epiphora in the emphatic construction “it is meditation in which” exploits the traditional images for man and woman, “head” and “heart”, respectively. These images and thus the associated gender binary, through the verbs “lose” and “melt”, are metaphorically meant to vanish, disappear. Man and woman also appear in close proximity with the positively connoted verb “help”, intensified by “tremendously”, and with the “meditation” and “transformation” associated with the powerful epithet “ultimate”. Meditation is so strongly enveloped in the emotional aspect of the inter-text that it radiates positive connotations, thus creating a strong impact.

Moreover, other sites of interest incorporate both coordinate structures, “woman and man”, and “man and woman”, collocating with rare lexical items “love” and “meeting”:

(21)  To love a woman or to love a man, a new kind of being is needed, which can accept the polar opposite. And only with the polar opposite — just as with negative and positive electricity meeting, electricity is born. Just like that, when life electricities meet — man and woman, yin and yang, Shiva and Shakti, when that meeting happens, that merger, that total oblivion, that drunkenness, when they have disappeared as separate entities, separate egos, are no longer there separate but are throbbing as one, two bodies in one soul — that is the first experience of no-mind, no-ego, no-time, and that is the first experience of samadhi.

An investigation of the language features in this concordance reveals the fronting of “love” in close proximity to the coordinate structure with “woman” first in order of mention. Both sexes reoccur with the attribute “polar opposites”; moreover they appear in close proximity to a novel attribute “a new kind of being”. The attribute “polar opposites” is reiterated to complete the previous statement through the intensifying similes “just as”, “just like”, as well as assigning a new positively connoted attribute to man and woman, “life electricities”. Furthermore, this attribute is reinforced through allusion to the opposing, complementary, and interdependent concepts of the non-dualistic philosophies of Hinduism, Buddhism, and Tantrism, yin and yang, Shiva and Shakti, representing male and female energies. Following man and woman’s “meeting”, the subsequent enumeration with the intensifier “that” of the words bearing a similar point of reference, associated “meeting” and “merger”, somewhat heterogeneous “total oblivion” and culminating “that drunkenness” create a temporary semantic field of the emotively charged lexical items. The embedded clauses with “when” within the subsequent complex syntactic structure consolidate the concept of meeting in “disappear as separate entities, separate egos”, “. . . no longer there separate”, and in interaction with the antithesis “two bodies in one soul” inevitably create the image of “one”. The subsequent enumeration with the attribute “no”, both through its position and meaning, intensifies “oneness”. The multi-sided depiction of man and woman’s meeting is completed by the reiterated parallel structures and final allusion to Samadhi, “a meditative condition of total absorption” (Clarke 2006: 24) which overcomes dualism.

The concept of “oneness” is further consolidated across the intertext through the attributes “complementary”, and “two counterparts of one whole”:

(22)	 . . . a man and woman are two counterparts of one whole, . . . they are complementary. And the complementariness is possible when their opposite poles meet.

Man and woman are neither equal nor unequal, they are unique. And the meeting of two unique beings brings something miraculous into existence.

Man and woman further receive positive content through the evaluative adjective “unique”, outweighing the predicative “neither equal nor unequal”, and their union assumes more positive connotations through another evaluative adjective, “miraculous”. The emerging collocates of man and woman are un expected; they strike by their novelty.

Furthermore, a scrutiny of the language features in yet another site of in terest, involving both coordinate structures, co-occurring “man and woman”, “woman and man”, reveals another novel image, “circle”, introduced and maintained across the whole concordance:

(23) Right now it will be difficult for you to make an inner circle. It will be easier to connect it with another pole — a woman or a man — and then the circle becomes complete. Then you can enjoy the blessings of the circle. But by and by you will be able to make the inner circle, because inside you also you are man and woman, woman and man. Nobody is just man and nobody is just woman — because you come from man and woman’s communion. Both have participated; your mother has given something to you, your father has given something to you. Fifty-fifty, they have contributed to you. Both are there. There is a possibility that both can meet inside you. Again your father and mother can love inside you. Then your reality will be born. Once they met when your body was born. Now if they can meet inside you, your soul will be born. That’s what transcendence of sex is: it is a higher sex.

The “circle” image is associated with both sexes and created by the contributing concepts of “connect”, “complete”, “communion” as well as assuming positive connotations in proximity with “the blessings”. The subsequent detailed expression of “making the inner circle” intensifies the reiterated image surrounding man and woman. Two coordinate structures, “man and woman”, “woman and man” “meet” within the same sentence; moreover they are adjacent. The repetition of the same idea, mother and father’s contribution, through synonymous words and structures intensifies the idea of man and woman’s communion. The parallel constructions with “nobody”, the reiterated “meet”, the different time reference in “once . . . body was born”, “now . . . soul will be born” prepare for the culminating transcendence of both sexes in the concluding emphatic construction, assuming positive connotations in close proximity to another novel attribute, “higher sex”.

Finally, another site of interest incorporates a novel coordinate structure “man and woman and man”:

(24)  Life is rhythm. When two persons meet, male and female, it becomes a circle: there will be gaps for both. You will be a woman and suddenly there will be a gap and you are no longer a woman, you have become a man. You will be man and woman and man. When these gaps are felt you can feel that you have achieved a circle. This circle is represented in Shiva’s symbol — the shivalinga. This circle is represented by the yoni of Devi and linga of Shiva. It is a circle. It is one of the peak phenomena of two high energies meeting.

The previously introduced image of “circle”, symbolizing man and woman’s meeting, communion, complementariness, holism is further invigorated by allusion to the Tantric symbols of the linga of Shiva and yoni of Devi, representing not only male and female sexuality, but also the universal polarity and the unity behind it (Frawley 2008). The symbolic merger of both sexes within a single novel coordinate structure “man and woman and man” intensifies the imagery, its emotional appeal. The syntactic design of the predominantly par allel structures in “You will be . . .”, “This circle is . . .”, “It is . . .” envelops “man and woman and man”. Moreover, the new evaluative attributes “peak” and “high” in implicit association with man and woman, with “energies”, assign a positively connoted new “whole” identity to both sexes.

# 7.	 Discussion

As required by the methodology of this study, we relate the qualitative analysis of the identified expanded concordance evidence to the context that we are aware of and can “infer from the co-text.” Across the inter-text both the adjacent and non-adjacent collocates influence the meaning of the node (Baker et al. 2008: 278–279), the coordinate structures with “man” and “woman” in the specialized corpus. The newly emerging collocates of these structures such as “understanding”, “love”, “polar opposite”, “meet”, “meeting”, “connect”, “complete”, “communion”, “circle”, “meditation”, “consciousness”, “transformation”, “transcendence”, “one” as opposed to “two”, “new”/“unique”, “being” have obvious positive connotations. These collocates create a seemingly positive semantic profile of the coordinate structures, and a positive discourse prosody for man and woman. The qualitative analysis of the expanded concordance evidence suggests that both structures attract collocates which are “charged” with holism. It is noteworthy that “transcendence”, “meditation”, and “holism” are New Age concepts (Askehave 2004: 5).

In the specialized corpus, the evidence on the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” seems to maintain the traditional gender roles in that woman is still referred and confined to the domestic and reproductive domains. Further, the issue of gender equality/inequality appears to be questioned, somewhat paradoxically though, through reiteration of gender difference in terms of being polar opposites. Interestingly, woman seems to be valued on the grounds of having womb which is in line with the findings of the pertinent studies of compatibility of traditional gender roles and a relative empowerment of women (Fuller and Martin 2003: 36) in the Eastern new religions. Furthermore, the analysis of the corpus evidence on the coordinate structures seems to confirm the previously observed paradox, which supports the results of the research on Osho’s teaching style (Clarke 2006: 254) and his “radically self-deconstructing philosophy” (Urban 1996: 171).

However, in the specialized corpus the gender binary as well as the institution of marriage are explicitly criticized and receive negative content. An appeal is made to both man and woman to liberate themselves from marital ties and to grow spiritually through meditation, which is consistent with the findings of the previous studies on Osho’s anti-institutional and anti-family views (Urban 1996: 169; Puttick 2003: 239) and his emphasis on meditation for man’s and woman’s spiritual development (D’Andrea 2007: 97).

Both woman and man are construed as unique, as polar opposites, life energies, rather than equal or unequal sexes in the specialized corpus. They are urged to meet, understand, connect with each other; this finding is in line with the results of the previous research on Osho’s model of sexuality “culminating in an ecstatic meeting of male and female energies” (Puttick 2004). Only thus can man and woman overcome their differences, dualism, transcend their sexes, and become “a higher sex”, assuming a new, positively connoted “whole identity”. The corpus evidence on the coordinate structures with “man” and “woman”, therefore, seems to indicate construal of a new “holistic” gender identity. For Osho, humans are complete and perfect aspects of the universe as a cosmic whole. Moreover, spiritual enlightenment aims at producing a more whole “new human” (Carter 1987: 165). It is also noteworthy that in the New Age “a state of being beyond sex” (Clarke 2006: 254), “androgyny: a balance and integration between the qualities so misleadingly termed feminine and masculine” is “increasingly commended” (Puttick 2003: 233).

# 8. Conclusion

In the present article, we attempt to contribute to the research into language and gender in the New Age talks through a novel approach (Baker et al. 2008) incorporating the corpus and qualitative analyses. We explore the coordinate structures “man and woman” and “woman and man” in the specialized corpus of the gender-related talks by Osho, one of the founders of the postmodern New Age movements. We relate the qualitative analysis of the pertinent corpus evidence to the social context, with the aim of revealing the gender construal in the specialized corpus.

The corpus analysis of the frequency, collocations, and concordances in relation to the coordinate structures “man and woman”, “woman and man” reveals the following. The frequency evidence demonstrates that the coordinate structure with “man” first in order of mention is predominant, thus suggesting the gender stereotype and asymmetry of the lexical items “man” and “woman” within the coordinate structure. Further, the collocation evidence seems to indicate that the semantic profile of the structures in the specialized corpus is comprised of the collocates suggesting the gender stereotype, as well as such collocates as “meeting”, “togetherness”, “meditation”, “love” suggesting new phenomena. Furthermore, the KWIC concordance evidence appears to indicate not only the conservative stereotype but also the challenge to it, as well as somewhat different views on gender.

The comparison of the pertinent corpus evidence from the specialized corpus with the general corpora, the BNC and COCA, reveals that the coordinate structure “man and woman”, with “man” first in order of mention, is highly frequent across all corpora, thus supporting our observations of the gender stereotype. However, some of the collocates of both coordinate structures in the specialized corpus, “meeting”, “togetherness”, “meditation”, “love”, are either absent or rare in the general corpora. These seemingly new collocates of the coordinate structures further reinforce our assumptions of the new phenomena and are regarded as significant for relating to gender construal in the specialized corpus.

Interestingly, the qualitative analysis of the expanded concordance evidence on the structures with “man” and “woman” in the present article suggests maintenance of traditional woman’s roles as well as, interestingly, challenge to the gender binary differences, and appeals for amelioration of gender relationship. The novel lexical collocates of the coordinate structures have positive connotations; consequently, a positive discourse prosody is gradually created for both sexes in that they are not in conflict any longer; rather, they meet, understand, love each other, are construed anew and evolve as one whole — a new being. Therefore, in the specialized corpus, both coordinate structures, “man and woman” and “woman and man”, with their newly emerging semantic profile, appear to have been “pressed into the service of the expression” (Baker et al. 2008: 289) of the New Age and Osho’s holistic views.

# Notes

1.	 Frequency: http://www.vuw.ac.nz/lals/staff/Paul_Nation; Concordance: http://www. concordancessoftware.co.uk.

2.	 http://www.antlab.sci.waseda.ac.jp/software/README_antconc3.2.1txt.   
3.	 BNC: http://corpus.byu.edu/bnc; COCA: http://www.americancorpus.org.

# References

Aidala, Angela A. 1985. Social change, gender roles, and new religious movements. Sociological Analysis 46(3). 287–314. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3710695 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Askehave, Inger. 2004. If language is a game — these are the rules: A search into the rhetoric of the spiritual self-help book If Life is a Game — These are the Rules. Dis course and Society 15(1). 5–31. http://www.sagepublications.com (accessed 12 October 2008).   
Baker, Paul. 2006. Using corpora in discourse analysis. London: Continuum.   
Baker, Paul, Costas Gabrielatos, Majid KhosraviNik, Michal Krzyzanowski, Tony McEnery & Ruth Wodak. 2008. A useful methodological synergy? Combining critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics to examine discourses of refugees and asylum seekers in the UK press. Discourse and Society 19. 273–306. http://das.sagepub.com (accessed 11 October 2008).   
Baranowski, Maciej. 2002. Current usage of epicene pronoun in written English. Journal of Sociolinguistics 6(3). 378–397. http://www3.interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/ 118961625/PDFSTART (accessed 20 October 2008).   
Bauman, Zygmunt. 1994. Intimations of postmodernity. London & New York: Routledge.   
Berg, Maarten C. 2008. New age advice: A ticket to happiness? Journal of Happiness Studies 9. 361–377. http://www.springerlink.com/content/e05qp77482744235/fulltext.pdf (accessed 20 March 2008).   
Caldas-Coulthard, Carmen Rosa & Rosamund Moon. 2010. Curvy, hunky, kinky: Using corpora as tools in critical analysis. Discourse & Society 21(2). 99–133. http://das.sagepub. com (accessed 27 April 2010).   
Cameron, Deborah. 2005. Language, gender, and sexuality: Current issues and new directions. Applied Linguistics 26(4). 482–502. http://applij.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/26/4/ 482 (accessed 14 February 2008).   
Carter, Lewis F. 1987. The “New Renunciates” of the Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh: Observations and identification of problems of interpreting new religious movements. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 26(2). 148–172. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1385791 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Clarke, Peter (ed.). 2006. New religions in global perspective. New York: Routledge.   
D’Andrea, Antony. 2007. Osho International Meditation Resort (Pune, 2000s): An anthropological analysis of sannyasin therapies and the Rajneesh legacy. Journal of Humanistic Psychology 47(1). 91–116. http://jhp.sagepub.com/cgi/content/abstract/47/1/91 (accessed 12 March 2009).   
Dawson, Lorne L. 1998. Anti-modernism, modernism, and postmodernism: Struggling with the cultural significance of new religious movements. Sociology of Religion 59(2). 131– 156. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3712077 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Drobin, Frederick A. 1999. Spirituality the new opiate. Journal of Religion and Health 38(3). 229–240. http://www.springerlink.com/content/v13t520188603772/fulltext.pdf (accessed 20 March 2008).   
Fairclough, Norman. 2005. Analyzing discourse: Textual analysis for social research. London & New York: Routledge.   
Flere, Sergej & Andrej Kırbıs. 2009. New Age, religiosity, and traditionalism: A cross-cultural comparison. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 48(1). 161–184. http://www3. interscience.wiley.com/cgi-bin/fulltext/122240222/PDFSTART (accessed 21 March 2009).   
Frawley, David. 2008. Inner Tantric Yoga: Working with the universal Shakti. Twin Lakes, WI: Lotus Press.   
Frosh, Stephen. 1994. Sexual differences: Masculinity and psychoanalysis. London & New York: Routledge.   
Fuller, Sylvia & John L. Martin. 2003. Women’s status in Eastern NRMs. Review of Reli gious Research 44(4). 354–369. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3512215 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Gesuato, Sara. 2003. The company women and men keep: What collocations can reveal about culture. Proceedings of Corpus Linguistics 2003, 253–262. University of Lancaster. http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/publications/CL2003/papers/gesuato.pdf (accessed 11 February 2009).   
Hanegraaff, Wouter J. 2000. New Age religion and secularization: Religions in the disenchanted world. Numen 47(39). 288–312. http://www.jstor.org/stable /3270327 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Heelas, Paul. 1993. The New Age in cultural context: The premodern, the modern, and the postmodern. Religion 23. 103–116.   
Holmes, Janet. 1991. Language and gender. Language Teaching 24(4). 207–220. http:// journals.cambridge.org/action/displayIssue?jid $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \Pi } } } } } =$ LTA&volumeId=24&issueId $_ { = 0 4 }$ &iid $= 2 7 5 6 7 5 2$ (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Holmes, Janet & Robert Sigley. 2002. What’s a word like girl doing in a place like this? Occasional labels, sexist usage and corpus research. In Pam Peters, Peter Collins & Adam Smith (eds.), New frontiers of corpus research, 247–264. Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Hunston, Susan. 2002. Corpora in applied linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ivakhiv, Adrian. 2003. Nature and self in new age pilgrimage. Culture and Religion 4(1). 93–118.   
Jacobs, Janet. 1984. The economy of love in religious commitment: The deconversion of women from nontraditional religious movements. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 23(2). 155–171. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1386106 (accessed 16 March 2009).   
Jacobs, Janet. 1991. Gender and power in new religious movements: A feminist discourse on the scientific study of religion. Religion 21. 345–356.   
Kjellmer, Göran. 1986. “The lesser man”: Observations on the role of women in modern English writings. In Jan Aarts & Willem Meijs (eds.), Corpus linguistics II, 163–176. Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Kress, Gunther & Theo van Leeuwen. 2001. Multimodal discourse: The models and media of contemporary communication. London: Arnold.   
Latkin, Carl A. 1989. Gender roles in an experimental community. Sex Roles 21. 629–652.   
Lyon, David. 1993. A bit of circus: Notes of postmodernity and new age. Religion 23. 117– 126.   
Mautner, Gerlinde. 1995. “Only connect.” Critical discourse analysis and corpus linguistics. University of Lancaster. http://ucrel.lancs.ac.uk/tech_papers.html (accessed 25 January 2008).   
McCarthy, Michael. 2001. Issues in applied linguistics. Cambridge: Cambridge University.   
McEnery, Tony, Richard Xiao & Yukio Tono. 2006. Corpus-based language studies: An advance resource book. London & New York: Routledge.   
Osho. 2002. The book of woman. London & New York: Penguin Group.   
Osho. 2004. The book of man. London & New York: Penguin Group.   
Palmer, Susan J. 1993. Women’s “cocoon work” in new religious movements: Sexual experimentation and feminine rites of passage. Journal for the Scientific Study of Religion 32(4). 343–355. http://www.jstor.org/stable/1387174 (accessed 20 March 2009).   
Partington, Alan. 2002. The linguistics of political argument: The spin-doctor and the wolfpack at the White House. London: Routledge.   
Partridge, Christopher (ed.). 2004. New religions: A guide. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Pearce, Michael. 2008. Investigating the collocational behaviour of MAN and WOMAN in the BNC using Sketch Engine. Corpora 3(1). 1–29. http://www.eupjournals.com/toc/cor/3/ 1 (accessed 25 March 2009).   
Puttick, Elizabeth. 1997. Women in new religions: In search of community, sexuality, and spiritual power. New York: St. Martin’s Press.   
Puttick, Elizabeth. 2003. Women in new religious movements. In Lorne Dawson (ed.), Cults and new religious movements: A reader, 230–244. Malden et al.: Blackwell.   
Puttick, Elizabeth. 2004. Tantric spirituality. In Christopher Partridge (ed.), New religions: A guide, 185–187. New York: Oxford University Press.   
Romaine, Suzanne. 2000. Language in society: An introduction to sociolinguistics, 2nd edn. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Sigley, Robert & Janet Holmes. 2002. Looking at girls in corpora of English. Journal of English Linguistics 30. 138–157. http://eng.sagepub.com/cgi/reprintsidebar/30/2/138 (accessed 21 March 2009).   
Sotillo, Susana & Dana Starace-Nastasi. 1999. Political discourse of a working-class town. Discourse and Society 10(2). 249–276. http://das.sagepub.com/content/vol10/issue2/ (accessed 21 March 2009).   
Stubbs, Michael. 1992. Institutional linguistics: Language and institutions, linguistics and sociology. In Rene Dirven & Michael Putz (eds.), Thirty years of linguistic evolution, 189– 211. Amsterdam & Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Stubbs, Michael. 1998 [1996]. Text and corpus analysis. Oxford: Blackwell.   
Stubbs, Michael. 2001. Texts, corpora and problems of interpretation: A response to Widdowson. Applied Linguistics 22(2). 149–172. http://applij.oxfordjournals.org/cgi/reprint/22/2/ 149 (accessed 12 March 2008).   
Teubert, Wolfgang. 2005. My version of corpus linguistics. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics 10(1). 1–13. http://www.ingentaconnect.com/content/jbp/ijcl/2005/00000010/ 00000001/art00001 (accessed 25 March 2008).   
Urban, Hugh B. 1996. Zorba the Buddha: Capitalism, charisma and the cult of Bhagwan Shree Rajneesh. Religion 26. 161–182.   
Urban, Hugh B. 2000. The cult of ecstasy: Tantrism, the New Age, and the spiritual logic of late capitalism. History of Religions 39(3). 268–304. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3176420 (accessed 20 March 2009).

Gülşen M. Vefalı is a lecturer at Eastern Mediterranean University in North Cyprus. She holds an M.A. in TEFL and a Ph.D. in linguistics. Her research interests include discourse analysis and corpus analysis. Address for correspondence: Education Faculty, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, North Cyprus, Mersin-10, Turkey <gulsen.musayeva@emu.edu.tr>.

Fulya Erdentuğ is a Ph.D. candidate at the Faculty of Communication and Media Studies at Eastern Mediterranean University in North Cyprus. She holds a B.A. in English language and literature, and an M.A. in English language teaching/educational studies. Her research interests include rhetoric and corpus analysis. Address for correspondence: Faculty of Communication and Media Studies, Eastern Mediterranean University, Famagusta, North Cyprus, Mersin-10, Turkey <fulyae00@gmail.com>.