# Theorizing and practicing critical english for academic purposes

Sarah Benesch

College of Staten Island, City University of New York

This Journal of English for academic purposes special issue on critical EAP (CEAP) explores a few key questions: How might critical be theorized in EAP contexts in today’s globalizing world? What are some ways CEAP is currently being practiced? What does CEAP contribute to EAP, from the perspectives of theory, research, and pedagogy?

The vitality of CEAP is seen in the variety of ways these questions are answered in this special issue. Yet, despite the range of contexts, methodologies, and pedagogies, the authors share certain assumptions about criticality and its relationship to EAP. All subscribe to a theory of language as discourses(s). Praxis, the reciprocal relationship between theory and practice, is a central concern for all. A reflexive stance toward praxis is apparent in each contribution. And, all situate praxis in the daily lives of students, instructors, and the institutional contexts in which they meet.

A spirit of reflexivity and interrogation is perhaps the most important of the shared assumptions. Some authors pose explicit questions; others embed their questions more implicitly. Yet all report their findings tentatively, avoiding definitive claims and answers. They demonstrate humility about the limits of knowledge and acknowledge incomplete understanding of the complex issues addressed.

In this introduction to the special issue I situate CEAP in its wider sociopolitical context, by discussing the exigencies of globalization and their impact on EAP students, teachers, and curricula. This is followed by a discussion of criticality in EAP, including its realization in the authors’ praxis.

# 1. Globalization as rationale for critical EAP

Critical EAP widens the lens of academic purposes to take the sociopolitical context of teaching and learning into account. This is not to say that CEAP overlooks on-the-ground requirements of academic genres and classroom interactions but, rather, that they are explored in relation to EAP students’ and teachers’ complex and overlapping social identities: class, race, gender, ethnicity, age and so on. Critical EAP considers hierarchical arrangements in the societies and institutions in which EAP takes place, examining power relations and their reciprocal relationship to the various players and materials involved. This social turn necessitates a reckoning with contemporary globalization and its possible effects on the institutions and classrooms in which EAP is carried out.

Definitions of globalization abound. However, whether celebratory or cautionary, most acknowledge significant growth in the ‘‘scale, penetration, and velocity of global capital’’ and ‘‘momentous changes in state sovereignty’’ (Appadurai, 2005, p.18). Due to the speed and flexibility with which capital and, in some cases, humans now flow, nation-states can no longer be considered self-contained sites with stable populations sharing a common culture. Coming to terms with these changes and processes in education requires, according to Rizvi (2000), an ‘‘integrated approach, which illuminates the changing global economic relations in terms of the changing social, political, and cultural landscapes’’ (p. 207), one leading to greater understanding of ‘‘the emergence of new cultural formations’’ (p. 208).

Alongside critical educators’ interest in examining new cultural formations, however, are concerns about possible negative effects of globalization on students’ daily lives. Appadurai (2005), for instance, decries the ‘‘spiraling processes of ecological degradation and crisis’’ (p. 17) due to unfettered development and a lack of oversight by state regulatory agencies. He also points to the growing disparity between haves and have nots both within and across countries, a result of ‘‘unviable relations between finance and manufacturing capital, as well as between goods and the wealth required to purchase them’’ (p. 17). For his part, Rizvi warns about the social costs of globalization, including ‘‘alienation, displacement, and uncertainty’’ brought about by ‘‘deterritorialization’’ (p. 210). According to Rizvi, ‘‘the detachment of culture from territory has unleashed a powerful force that affects us all, and not just those who are directly involved’’ (p. 210).

The social changes resulting from globalization are fertile ground for critical EAP to explore the relationship between academic English(es) and the larger sociopolitical context. With EAP teachers and students ‘‘now collectively occupy[ing] global, interconnected spaces’’ (Morgan & Ramanathan, 2005, p. 152), CEAP’s mandate is ‘‘cultivating a citizenry that is able to negotiate and critically engage with the numerous texts, modalities, technologies coming at learners’’ (p. 152). To explore how these aims might be carried out, I next discuss some general principles of, and strategies for, critical teaching and learning in EAP.

# 2. Principles of critical teaching and learning

For the critical to happen, there must be some actual dissociation from one’s available explanatory texts and discourses - a denaturalization and discomfort and ‘‘making the familiar strange’’ (Luke, 2004, p. 26e7).

Morgan, in this issue, asks whether it’s even possible to teach critical questioning, including attention to power relations and inequalities. He asks, ‘‘Is it innate? Does it come about by chance? Or is it a unique product of family and community experience?’’ Morgan believes that critical questioning can be taught, but perhaps not in ways that serve the teaching of ‘‘more conventionalized content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge’’. Teaching critical questioning, according to Morgan, offers ‘‘possibilities rather than certainties’’ aimed at encouraging students and instructors to reconceptualize traditional ‘‘roles and responsibilities’’. The parameters of traditional roles/responsibilities, whether of student, teacher, worker, parent, or other subject positions, are socially constructed and therefore open to questioning and reform, in light of new possibilities.

The type of reconceptualizing called for by Morgan is a process Luke (2004) describes as ‘‘.the out-of-body experience of watching oneself watch oneself as an object of power and naming oneself as such’’ (p. 28). Luke credits Freire with the legacy of ‘being critical’ (p. 23), yet cautions that the economic and social conditions Freire was responding to with his critical pedagogy differed from those of the contemporary globalizing world. The context of Freire’s praxis was the ‘‘actual time of decolonization’’ and ‘‘addressed a binary dialectical universe of oppression and liberation, hope and despair’’ and a Marxist understanding of ‘‘one’s conscious relationship to the means of production’’ (p. 23). It offered marginalized people tools, such as naming and problem-posing, so that they might better understand their position vis a vis their colonizers and achieve ‘‘historical self-determination’’ (p. 23), individually and collectively.

While retaining Freire’s notion of naming and problematization, Luke (2004) updates these pedagogical processes, taking into account the ‘‘textual/linguistic/semiotic turn’’ (p. 22) of poststructuralism. This turn is required because contemporary life calls for an understanding of ‘‘how naming constitutes the world through text and discourse’’ (p.22). Setting this critical process in motion pedagogically entails ‘‘an analytic move to self-position oneself as Other’’ which Luke describes as ‘‘a sense of being beside oneself or outside oneself in another epistemological discourse, and political space than one typically would inhabit’’ (Luke, 2004, p. 26). If students are able to position themselves as Other, they might then engage in ‘‘textual analysis and the use of analytic metalanguage - the ‘doubling’ discourses that name and rename experience and the social and physical world’’ (p. 27).

Learning to engage in the self-Othering proposed by Luke involves, according to Morgan and Ramanathan (2005), making ‘subject-in-discourse’ the ‘‘primary unit of analysis’’ (p. 153). They further explain, from the theoretical perspective of language-as-discourse, that ‘‘individual and collective understandings.do not preexist their linguistic expression but are, instead, created and contested through dominant and subversive language practices’’ (p. 153). This understanding includes a notion of identity as ‘‘fluid and emergent’’ (p. 153).

Along the same theoretical lines of language learners as subjects-in-discourse negotiating fluid and emergent identities, Canagarajah (2004) conceptualizes language learning as processes by which ‘‘learners negotiate competing subject positions in conflicting discourse communities’’(p. 117). A possible aim of critical language teaching is therefore to facilitate ‘‘a safe way of adopting alternative identities without being penalized for (what is perceived as) deviant behavior’’ (p. 120). Implementing critical pedagogy, including CEAP, might allow students to ‘‘celebrate suppressed identities and go further to develop subversive discourses that inspire resistance against their domination’’ (p. 121).

# 3. Critical EAP research and praxis

The tension between dominant and subversive discourses is nicely illustrated by Appleby in this special issue. Her discussion of interactions between EAP students in East Timor and their white middle-class female teachers from Australia around gender issues, in an international development context, is an important example of the relationship between suppression and resistance. Appleby discovered, through interviews, that the teachers were at times uncomfortable in their role as ‘‘Western’’ women and uncertain about how to respond to gendered situations: should they should accept what appeared to them as gender inequality in the behavior and language of their students or should they instead challenge it? Would challenging the status quo be an imposition of their own culturally-specific notions of gender equality and therefore serve as a dominating discourse?

Appleby concludes from her research that EAP teachers might channel their uncertainty about how to reconcile the various gender discourses circulating inside and outside the classroom into lessons intended to generate ‘‘greater awareness of the struggle over multiple differences’’. She suggests that teachers resist assuming a posture of ‘‘cultural superiority’’ in the face of competing discourses and, instead, embrace a position ‘‘within the grey area of uncertainty’’. Calling the context in which her Australian subjects taught ‘‘the contact zone of development’’, Appleby proposes ‘‘opening a space for questioning, and an exploration of the ways in which gender and other dimensions of difference are played out in students’ experiences and perceptions; and an exploration of teachers’ own gendered, yet ambiguously complicit, experiences in the contact zones between communities engaged in development’’.

Appleby’s suggestions for engaging students in critical EAP contact zones, based on her research findings, are welcome. To move these kinds of proposals into the realm of praxis requires descriptions of what critical teaching looks and sounds like in the classroom, at what Cadman (2005) calls the ‘‘micro-ethnographic level’’ (p. 354). These accounts would not serve as prescriptions or models for readers to follow, but rather as examples of trial and error, showing the messiness of teachers and students experimenting with critical processes. These accounts would demonstrate what Pennycook (2004), referring to critical teaching, has called ‘‘an ongoing, moment-by-moment process of slowly prodding for possibilities’’ (p. 341) and ‘‘the quiet seeking out of moments, the results of which we don’t always know’’ (p. 342.).

This type of moment-by-moment pedagogical decision-making is captured in this special issue in the contributions of Chun, Grey, and Phan Le Ha. Each presents students’ responses to materials, assignments, and classroom interactions. They also discuss how responses were taken up dialogically to explore ‘‘possibilities rather than certainties’’ and ‘‘new roles and responsibilities’’, called for by Morgan.

Chun, for example, asked students to respond to EAP textbook material on ‘‘emotional intelligence’’, touted in the textbook chapter as a skill required to improve one’s chances in the job market and in one’s personal life. Finding his EAP students uninspired by the emotional intelligence premise, Chun invited them to respond to a cartoon in the chapter dichotomizing intelligence vs. emotion in its depiction of ‘‘a ‘genius’ scientist (signified by his unkempt hair and glazed bespectacled eyes) deep in thought, mumbling a complex mathematical equation in response to a female colleague’s friendly greeting of ‘good morning’.’’ Chun asked students to ignore the framing device of emotional intelligence and simply discuss the cartoon in groups. The students began ‘‘offering observations about the specific gender roles these scientists were made to perform. Comments such as ‘women are caring’ and ‘men don’t like to show emotion’ began to circulate, presenting the opportunity to start examining the genderized messages in the cartoon with the class’’. As the class discussion continued Chun found his students ‘‘questioning the assumptions underlying the cartoon: why is the female scientist the one to be ‘emotionally intelligent’ and not her male colleague? Why isn’t intellect sufficient for these professionals to function properly in their work environment of the laboratory?’’

Like Chun, Grey engaged her EAP students in examining social roles and difference. She gave them an assignment to ‘‘photograph their understandings of diversity in different communities where they would encounter uncertainty and contradiction’’, using mobile phones, digital cameras, and writing material. The students, who Grey calls ‘‘nomadic ethnographers’’ were invited to present their ethnographic material to the class. Focusing on one photograph, a hybrid image of a digitally-composed face comprised of features from each group member, Grey describes students’ reactions, questions, and concerns. She also includes her own internal thoughts and vocalized contributions to the class discussion of the photo. Grey claims that the image ‘‘subverted hegemonic understandings of race and gender and produced nonsense, not common sense, thus disrupting our thinking about gender, race and diversity’’. In the context of an EAP business course, this assignment was ‘‘an ethical one’’ given ‘‘changing globalized circumstances’’ in which Grey and her students find themselves. Concerned, above all, about her international students’ likely deterritorialization, Grey aimed to take risks, to ‘‘lose ‘control’ of the curriculum’’ so that her students might ‘‘experience the highs and lows of engaging with the politics of difference’’.

Phan Le Ha, too, took risks in her own academic writing and in her work with Arianto, a graduate student from Indonesia. Drawing on her prior experience as a graduate student from Vietnam who had struggled with Australian academic writing conventions and genres, the author responds to Arianto’s request to help him appropriate English for his own purposes. Phan Le Ha describes the tensions each faced around the following issues: What are the conventions that must be followed in academic English? What might be areas of appropriation? How do non-native speakers gain support for their writing among graduate advisors and journal editors, especially when defying convention?

The critical component of the interaction between Phan Le Ha and Arianto is apparent in moments of contradiction. Both find themselves imposing academic conventions on their students (he on his writing students, she on Arianto), ones that they aimed to challenge in their own academic writing. Arianto raises the following concern in his journal: ‘‘Maybe the norms are so powerful and the students have been soaked in these norms the moment they learnt writing in English. What should I do?’’ Rather than offering a definitive answer to Arianto’s question, the author retains a stance of healthy ambiguity. She offers the metaphor of needs and rights, reminding Arianto of the importance of making students ‘‘aware of possibilities in having a voice and writer identity’’ yet at the same time respecting their choices because ‘‘any act of writing involves becoming, whichever directions it could take’’. Her conclusion is that the ‘‘becoming path’’ is one that addresses both institutional needs and students’ individual and collective rights.

# 4. Final reflections: critical EAP as hopeful praxis and situated connection

Morgan poses several challenging questions about critical EAP in his contribution to this issue. One is, ‘‘Do we inadvertently promote pedagogies of despair and pessimism?’’ In his answer, Morgan points to terms such as linguistic imperialism and monoculturalization that could discourage students from CEAP teaching because of the hopelessness and pain conveyed. To prevent alienating prospective CEAP teachers, he recommends avoiding an overly pessimistic stance, one that invites no agency or prospect of changing unfavorable conditions. In the interest of inspiring hope, he advises critical EAP teachers and teacher educators to include ‘‘texts that speak to the many joys of language teaching’’.

Morgan’s focus on affectivity in the EAP classroom is shared by Cadman (2005) who proposes a ‘‘pedagogy of connection’’, as a way to promote joyful and productive learning. A pedagogy of connection is a feature of Cadman’s critical EAP praxis, one that mediates the often contested relationship ‘‘between students’ learning and institutional perceptions of success’’ (p. 355). Above all, Cadman is concerned with creating the conditions for ‘‘comfortable negotiation of desire, agentive stance, and multiple identity positions’’ (p. 365). She attempts to achieve these conditions through a hospitable classroom environment, ‘‘a place where students want to be’’ because they can connect to the teacher and other students through humor and a sense of belonging.

I’m reminded by Morgan’s and Cadman’s attention to affectivity of the centrality of situatedness in critical praxis. That is, critical teaching is not intended to mine the world for problems which are then presented to students as hot topics for debate, e.g., abortion, pollution, identity theft. These general and often troubling topics may not be of interest to or concern in students’ daily lives and, even if they are, there may be no context for their engagement in the classroom or institution in which EAP is offered. Nor should CEAP bombard future EAP teachers with decontextualized and abstract notions, such as hegemony, that, as Morgan points out, could fill students with despair and turn them away from teaching.

On the other hand, critical EAP does not avoid difficult issues simply because they might initially elicit discomfort. Instead, grounded in the theoretical construct of situatedness, critical EAP finds its subjects in the daily and academic lives of students, presenting those topics respectfully to promote deep emotional connection and intellectual engagement.

An example of situatedness in my own critical EAP praxis is a lesson I developed on military recruitment (Benesch, 2007, in press). This topic was a direct response to the presence of military recruiters on the campus of the publicly-funded college where I teach in the U.S. According to law, educational institutions receiving any funding from the U.S. government must permit access to recruiters. Being aware of their presence at the college and concerned about ‘‘fast-track citizenship’’1 , a recruitment tool targeting immigrants, I wondered whether any of my EAP students had been approached and, if so, how they had responded. As it turned out, after introducing the topic, through an article debating the pros and cons of military recruitment on college campuses, I discovered that out of 15 students in the EAP class 2, one Latin American and one Nigerian, had been approached by recruiters on campus. None of the Chinese, Polish, or Russian students, who comprised the rest of the class, had been approached. This finding, in itself, was important and led to a lively class discussion of which immigrant groups might be targeted and why. Though, for the most part, students did not think that recruiters should be barred from campus, many welcomed strategies and language for deflecting recruiters’ advances.

Because military recruitment was situated in students’ lives, engaging with it seemed to give them hope, along with tools, to deal with it. That is, examining difficult issues need not fill students with despair. It may instead create the types of connections called for by Cadman (2005) by responding to a situation students face in their daily lives yet one which they might not be equipped to address.

I hope this JEAP special issue on critical EAP inspires teacher/researchers to engage with the theories and practices described in the contributions. I look forward to their accounts of CEAP so that its praxis may be further demystified and its literature grow.

Finally, I’d like to express deep appreciation to the accomplished scholars who agreed to review manuscripts for this issue. Thanks to the following for their prompt and generous feedback to the contributors: Elsa Auerbach, Kate Cadman, Chris Casanave, Tara Goldstein, Darryl Hocking, Ryuko Kubota, Brian Morgan, Brian Paltridge,, Alastair Pennycook, Jane Sunderland, and Steven Talmy. And special thanks to Ken Hyland and Kathy Leung for their editorial advice and support.

# References

Appadurai, A. (2005). Grassroots globalization and the research imagination. In A. Appadurai (Ed.), Globalization (pp. 2e21). Durham, NC: Duke University Press.   
Benesch, S. (April, 2007). Critical praxis as materials development: Countering military recruitment on a U.S. campus. In Paper presented at the meeting of International Society for Language Studies Conference (ISLS). Honolulu, HI.   
Benesch, S. (in press). Critical praxis as materials development: Responding to military recruitment on a U.S. campus. In N. Harwood (Ed.). Materials in ELT: Theory & practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Cadman, K. (2005). Towards a ‘pedagogy of connection’ in critical research education: A REAL story. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4, 353e367.   
Canagarajah, S. (2004). Subversive identities, pedagogical safe houses, and critical learning. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 116e137). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Luke, A. (2004). Two takes on the critical. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 21e29). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Morgan, B., & Ramanathan, V. (2005). Critical perspectives and language education: Global and local perspectives. Annual Review of Applied Lingusitics, 25, 151e169.   
Pennycook, A. (2004). Critical moments in a TESOL praxicum. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 327e345). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Rizvi, F. (2000). International education and the production of global imagination. In N. C. Burbules, & C. A. Torres (Eds.), Globalization and education: Critical perspectives (pp. 205e225). New York: Routledge.