# Informational packaging, level of formality, and the use of circumstance adverbials in L1 and L2 student academic presentations \*

Alla Zareva\*

Department of Linguistics, 347 Gordy Hall, Ohio University, Athens, OH 45701, USA

# Abstract

The analysis of circumstance adverbials in this paper was based on L1 and L2 corpora of student presentations, each of which consisting of approximately 30,000 words. The overall goal of the investigation was to identify specific functions L1 and L2 college students attributed to circumstance adverbials (the most frequently used adverbial class in the data) in relation to packaging the informational content of their presentations and their perceived level of formality of the genre. The analysis revealed differences in the range of functions the adverbials served in the L1 and L2 presentations which, in turn, pointed to differences in the participants’ perceived level of formality and degree of interactiveness of the speech event. The L1 presenters seemed to perceive the academic presentation as an opportunity not only to present information in an informal way, but also to interact with the audience and keep it involved in their presentations. By contrast, the L2 presenters seemed to be preoccupied with the informational content of their presentations, frequently to the exclusion of their peers from the process of information negotiation, which suggested a more formal and informative function they attributed to the presentation as a speech event than the native speakers.

$^ { © }$ 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: student academic presentations; corpus linguistics; circumstance adverbials; discourse functions; informational packaging; evel of formality

Giving effective presentations in academic settings is a task that both students and instructors recognize as essential to the training of would-be professionals. Well planned, logically organized, effectively handled, and convincingly delivered presentations are increasingly seen as an integral part of college student professional training. Thus, student presentations have become a requirement of many undergraduate and graduate courses where they are usually part of some independently carried research or a final paper project. However, in my personal experience, the majority of the students who are assigned to give presentations in their respective areas of specialization consistently report lack of any presentation giving training in addition to lack of explicit instruction about the presentation evaluation criteria. It seems, then, that most of the instructors assume that students simply ‘‘know’’ how to put together a presentation either based on their previous experience with presenting or, possibly, by modeling their presentations after the prepared discourse of more experienced presentersdfor instance, their instructors. In either event, there is a need for research in this academic genre because as much as we know about oral academic discourse (e.g., Andeweg, de Jong, & Hoeken, 1998; Boyd, 1989; Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2001; Dubois, 1980a, 1980b, 1982; Magin & Helmore, 2001; Mauranen, 2001, 2002; Reinhart, 2002; RowleyJolivet, 1999, 2007; Simpson, 2004; Simpson & Swales, 2001; Swales, 1990, 2001; Thompson, 2002; Vassileva, 2002; Ventola, Shalom, & Thompson, 2002; Webber, 2005; Weissberg, 1993, etc.), we still know little about the features of student academic presentations, which is probably why recommendations about giving an ‘‘effective’’ presentation are largely prescriptive and, very often, away from the reality of students’ actual performance. In a similar vein, the need to study student prepared discourse becomes even more pressing in second language (L2) contexts where students usually do not have previous experience with presenting in their native or subsequent language(s), nor do they have sufficient experience with the traditions of this academic genre in their L2 educational setting. In that sense, knowledge about the different aspects (e.g., lexical, grammatical, discourse, etc.) of the content organization of academic presentations may have valuable implications for incorporating the features of this academic genre in the L2 instruction, provided to newly admitted graduate and undergraduate students by ESL Programs at many North American universities.

# 1. The academic presentation as a genre. Informational packaging and the use of adverbials

By and large, student academic presentations have received more attention from a public speaking than linguistic point of view and, so far, as I have been able to determine, publications regarding the linguistic features of this genre are sparse. There is no doubt, however, that academic presentations given by students form an integral part of the network of academic genres, which Swales (2004) defines as ‘the totality of genres available for a particular sector’ (p. 22). Thus, the student academic presentation as a genre comes with a set of features that distinguishes it from other academic genresdfor instance, lectures, written papers, conference presentations or other types of research presentations given by professionals. These features are yet to be found, but for the purposes of this paper, a student academic presentation will be operationalized as a public speaking event in an academic context which has the communicative function of informing an audience of peers in a structured way about a topic of academic interest to both the presenter and the audience as researched and prepared by the student presenter. So, some of the most prominent features characterizing the academic presentation are its monologic mode of oral delivery, narrative structure, and informational character which, in turn, require the use of a variety of language forms to package the information and realize the functions a presentation serves.

One such language form is the broad category of adverbials. By and large, adverbials play an important role in academic discourse as they are most frequently employed to establish references of place, time, manner, and other deictic parameters of situations and processes. They are also used to convey speaker’s stance and comments or to perform connecting functions, which personalizes the discourse and facilitates its logical flow. All these functions of adverbs and adverbials significantly affect the ways meaning is organized and conveyed by speakers and interpreted by listeners (Conrad, 1998; Diessel, 2005; Hawkins, 2000; Hinkel, 2003; Wasow, 1997a; 1997b). Previous work on the roles and functions of adverbs and adverbials in English language corpora has also emphasized their importance and remarkable diversity in the language and the fact that their realizations vary widely across registers (e.g., Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, & Finegan, 1999; Biber, Conrad, Reppen, Byrd, & Helt, 2002; Hoye, 1997). Consequently, in the last couple of decades, corpus analyses have allowed for a lot of fresh insights into the meanings, uses, positions, and functions of adverbials of all types which has thrown new light on the uses of these structures in discourse construction (Chen, 2006; Hinkel, 2003).

However, despite the substantial insights gained into the meanings and functions of adverbs and adverbials as used by native speakers (NSs) of English, far less is known about their uses in non-native speaker (NNS) discoursedparticularly, in comparison to NSs. Such an investigation can be of great practical value, especially in light of Weissberg’s (1993) observation that NNSs often view the task of giving a presentation not only as a linguistically demanding task, but also as one that entails mastering a written text and then orally delivering it. Corpus work on English, however, has shown remarkable differences between spoken and written discourse, which are also evident in the use of adverbials across registers not only in frequency but also in type (for more details, see Biber et al., 1999). Such findings come to further highlight the importance of including in the curriculum of English for academic purposes (EAP) or English for specific purposes (ESP) language programs discussions focusing not only on general differences between speaking and writing, but also discussions about specific realizations of those differences, such as the functions and uses of all adverbial classes in academic spoken and written discourse. Thus, on a more practical plane, the identification of specific differences in the adverbial uses among native and nonnative college student presenters may give us valuable insights into possible divergences in the L2 and L1 features of informational packaging and overall perception of the presentation as a speech event, even among proficient L2 users.

# 2. Some sorting of English adverbials

Traditional English grammars view adverbs as a very large and diverse category that includes modifiers of verbs, adjectives, other adverbs, clauses, and whole sentences. The term ‘‘adverbial’’, however, extends the class of single word modifiers to include prepositional phrases, noun phrases, and clauses which are elements of the main verb of a clause rather than constituents of other phrases (Biber et al., 1999; Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, & Svartvik, 1985). Hence, the category of adverbials encompasses structures modifying the main verb of a clause (e.g., Sometimes you can find this in texts.) or an entire clause (e.g., In my opinion, the author made an important point.), but not structures that are constituents of noun phrases (e.g., In different studies they looked at the social relationships among adolescents.), adjective phrases (e.g., This was not quite obvious to me), or adverb phrases (e.g., She considered this opportunity very seriously.)

Given the diversity of meanings, functions, and positions of English adverbials, it is not surprising that one may find a good amount of variation in the classification of adverbials. Overall, researchers seem to agree upon the need of analyzing them with regard to their syntactic, semantic, and discourse pragmatic function. However, various scholars have put different emphases on each of those classification criteria which, in turn, has resulted in numerous, partially overlapping taxonomies of English adverbials (e.g., Bellert, 1977; Buysschaert, 1982, 1987; Jackendoff, 1972; Parsons, 1990; Quirk et al.,1985, etc.). For the purposes of this study, since the adverbial analysis was based on two corpora of student presentations, I considered it most appropriate to adopt a classification used in the study of a much larger corpus, analyzed in greater detail than the present study allowed. The adverbial classification adopted in this paper is based on the classification provided by Biber et al. (1999), which distinguishes between three major classes of adverbialsdi.e., circumstance adverbials, stance adverbials, and linking adverbials. Circumstance adverbials, which were the focus of my analysis, give information regarding the circumstances surrounding a process or an action with respect to place, time, manner, cause, intensity of the action, etc. They are the most commonly used class of adverbials by English NSs, the most semantically varied class of adverbials, as well as the best integrated into the sentence structure category. Stance adverbials express a person’s views on what they are saying, regarding the truth value, the degree of certainty, the precision, etc. of a proposition. The third class of adverbialsdlinking adverbialsdserve a connective function between units of discourse of different length and in that they are closely linked to discourse markers.

Each of these three major classes is further subdivided into semantic categories and subcategories to give the wide range of meanings adverbials may convey as well as to show the distribution of semantic patterns associated with each of the major classes across various registers. Given the narrower scope of adverbial analysis offered in this paper, Table 1 presents only the subcategories of circumstance adverbials found in the data.1

The overall goal of my analysis is to investigate student academic presentations with respect to the specific task demands this genre puts upon English native and non-native speaking students in the Humanities, Social and Behavioral Sciences. More specifically, I will examine comparatively the presenters’ use of different types of circumstance adverbials, in the context in which they were used, with an eye to their functions and effect. Those functions and effects will be discussed in relation to students’ perceived level of formality of this academic genre and in light of other corpus findings. I will conclude with discussing some problematic areas in the NNSs’ knowledge of adverbial uses and their implications for teaching different aspects of the academic presentation as a genre in EAP and/ or ESP language programs.

Table 1 Semantic Sub-Categories of Circumstance Adverbials Used in the Analysis.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="3">CIRCUMSTANCE ADVERBIALS</td></tr><tr><td>Semantic Category</td><td>Semantic Subcategory</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">1. Place Adverbials</td><td>Position adverbials</td><td>Sometimes you can see this in texts..</td></tr><tr><td>Direction adverbials</td><td>Many European immigrants decided to go to the United States.</td></tr><tr><td>Distance adverbials</td><td>The jaguars went a long way to home.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">2. Time Adverbials</td><td>Position in time adverbials</td><td>The term &quot;automatism&#x27; was introduced by Samuels in 1973..</td></tr><tr><td>Duration adverbials</td><td>One of the main um project coordinators discovered the problem and they tried to fix it for a whole week..</td></tr><tr><td>Frequency adverbials</td><td>They usually wrote two to three entries per week.</td></tr><tr><td>Temporal relationship adverbials</td><td>So, when they are all combined, we have some non-words that follow. the Indonesian sequence.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">3. Process Adverbials</td><td>Manner adverbials</td><td>Animal experiments do not work this way.</td></tr><tr><td>Means adverbials</td><td>They&#x27;re able to recreate themselves by giving themselves new names</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>and finding a new way of thinking..</td></tr><tr><td>Instrument adverbials Agentive adverbials</td><td>They tried to break it with a hammer but it was too hard..</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">4. Contingency Adverbials</td><td></td><td>The book was written by Adam Smith.</td></tr><tr><td>Reason/cause adverbials</td><td>I think he will do X because he thinks I will do Y..</td></tr><tr><td>Purpose adverbials</td><td>Let me set the time to remind myself when to stop.</td></tr><tr><td>Concession adverbials</td><td>They knew about culture shock although they didn&#x27;t have any previous</td></tr><tr><td>Condition adverbials</td><td>overseas experience. If you remember from Kanno&#x27;s book, Kinji&#x27;s story was set up in Kohai.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">5. Degree Adverbials</td><td>Result adverbials</td><td>They designed a follow-up study as a result of their earlier findings.</td></tr><tr><td>Amplifiers and diminishers</td><td>So if you know someone who&#x27;s a lawyer, you might laugh more at the joke of the lawyer. Um they emphasized a little bit less on this aspect but I&#x27;ll talk about that in a minute..</td></tr><tr><td>6. Addition/Restriction Adverbials</td><td>Addition/Restriction adverbials</td><td>Then you have the modern poetry which most of you probably are. familiar with as well. And his professor only wrote this one line in his letter of recommendation-&quot;This guy is a genius&quot;.</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">7. Other Adverbials</td><td>Respect adverbials</td><td>So as far as scientific and technological concepts go, they said that um</td></tr><tr><td>Approximating adverbials</td><td>using English doesn&#x27;t really help them getting across these ideas.</td></tr><tr><td>Amount adverbials</td><td>They came to the United States around the age of twelve. I was like wow this is a huge topic um and so I split it up in five</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>different arguments or topics that I wanted to do.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3. The study

# 3.1. Method and corpus

This study is based on L1 and L2 adverbially annotated corpora of student academic presentations in the Humanities, Social and Behavioral Sciences. The overall corpus contains 32 individual presentations, given by 32 different presenters of both genders (22 females and 10 males), between the ages of 18 and 35 $M = 2 2 . 9 )$ ). The data were obtained from presentations given by native and non-native speaking college students in three U.S. universities during their routinely scheduled class presentation. The L1 corpus consists of 30,205 tokens of individual student presentations given by $1 6 ~ \mathrm { N S s }$ of American Englishdgraduate $( n = 1 )$ ) and undergraduate $( n = 1 5$ ) students of different majors. The L2 corpus consists of 30,262 tokens of 16 individual presentations delivered by speakers of seven languages: Chinese $( n = 2 )$ ), Japanese $( n = 2 )$ ), Korean $( n = 5 )$ , Portuguese $( n = 2 )$ ), Spanish $( n = 2 )$ , German $( n = 2 )$ , and Norwegian $\lceil n = 1 \rceil$ ). At the time of the data collection, all NNSs were admitted to undergraduate $( n = 1 1 $ ) and graduate $( n = 5 )$ ) programs and were actively pursuing studies toward degree completion. All graduate student participants, native and non-native speaking, were in their first semester of study in their respective areas of specialization. Only one NNS had previously attended high school for 4 years in an English speaking country, while the rest of the non-native speaking presenters had learned English through formal instruction in their native countries and had spent between 0.2 and 3.5 years in the U.S. (1.1 year on average).

The presentations were on topics of the participants’ choice and satisfied either a requirement for a final project presentation or presentation on a final paper. As such, they were given over the last couple of weeks of the respective semesters in which they were scheduled, in a classroom setting, before an audience of peers. All (but one) presentations were theoretical, based on library research (i.e. secondary sources), so the students were not discussing primary data (even the case study in the L2 corpus). Since many variables might potentially affect any given type of discourse, care was also taken to match the L1 and L2 corpus as closely as possible in terms of discipline, audience size, time limit, use of visuals, grade received for the assignment, etc.; however, full match was not possible (see Appendix A).

All presentations were graded as high-quality presentations by the respective instructors, i.e. they received the highest possible grade for the assignment, based on the instructors’ own grading criteria. That data, however, were not collected. The presenters completed a questionnaire which, in addition to collecting demographic information about the participants, contained questions regarding the students’ experience with presenting and the importance they placed on delivering good presentations. Only one L1 student reported some coursework done in high-school on public speaking and receiving explicit instruction on how to give a presentation. The rest of the participants had no previous training in that genre, neither have they ever been guided through the process of preparing a presentation. Both groups of participants considered it very important to have good presentation skills, more so the NNSs than the NSs (on a six-point scale, $M _ { \mathrm { N S s } } = 5 . 1$ and $M _ { \mathrm { N N S s } } = 5 . 6$ . The difference may partly be explained by the differing experiences with presenting both groups haddfor example, the NSs reported having been required to give on average six presentations per semester, while the NNSs had much less experience with presenting in English, primarily because most of them were just beginning their studies in their respective U.S. universities. Not surprisingly, the L1 participants felt more self-confident in their skills as presenters and reported relatively high self-evaluation on the current state of their presentation skills (on a six-point scale, $M _ { \mathrm { N S s } } = 4 . 4$ ) compared to the NNSs $M _ { \mathrm { N N S s } } = 3 . 1$ ) who felt they needed to work a lot more on developing those skills.

All presentations were audio- or video-recorded and afterwards transcribed. When it comes to the study of a category as diverse as adverbials, there seems to be a consensus among corpus linguists that adverbial structures are diffcult to analyze automatically, even with tagged corpora, since they can take diverse forms, and the same forms can serve other than adverbial functions (Conrad, 1998). Therefore, given the relatively small size of the two corpora used in the study, the data were manually annotated for each of the adverbial categories listed in Table 1 to allow the use of text analysis software (in this case, MonoConc Pro Version 2.0) for analyzing the adverbial structures in context. The examination of the adverbial structures included in the analysis showed that they were all grammatically wellstructured, which is an important concern when NS and NNS corpora are analyzed comparatively. The details of both corpora are presented in Table 2.

# 3.2. Discussion

At a glance, Table 2 reveals two immediately noticeable features: the L2 participants tended to use a greater number of adverbials than the NSs, which trend, however, was uneven across the various sub-categories. Each of these two trends will be discussed in greater detail in the following paragraphs with the aim of highlighting some of the differences between the L1 and L2 participants in their choice of circumstance adverbials only. The findings will be viewed in light of the findings from the more comprehensive study on adverbials done by Biber et al. (1999). As interesting as the categories of stance and linking adverbials are, they will not be dealt with in this paperdthey deserve to be analyzed in their own right in separate analyses since they seem to indicate two interesting trends (i.e. the non-native speaking participants used much more frequently linking adverbials and much less frequently stance adverbials than the native-speaking presenters), which may come with some useful findings.

Table 2 Overall Frequency of the Adverbials Found in the L1 and L2 Corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">L2 corpus</td><td colspan="2">L1 corpus</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Raw frequency</td><td>Frequency per 10,000 words</td><td> Raw frequency</td><td>Frequency per 10,000 words.</td></tr><tr><td>Number of presentations</td><td>16</td><td></td><td>16</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Corpus size in words</td><td>30,262</td><td></td><td>30,205</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Total number of adverbials</td><td>2535</td><td></td><td>2370</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>.Number of circumstance adverbials</td><td>1,736</td><td>574</td><td>1,675</td><td>555</td></tr><tr><td>.Number of linking adverbials.</td><td>606</td><td>200</td><td>381</td><td>126</td></tr><tr><td>.Number of stance adverbials.</td><td>193</td><td>64</td><td>314</td><td>104</td></tr></table></body></html>

As mentioned earlier, one cannot but notice that most of the literature discussing presentations treats the notion of giving a presentation more as a public speaking rather than a language event. A great deal of the advice given in the ‘‘how-to’’ books (e.g., Grice & Skinner, 1995; Gronbeck, German, Ehninger, & Monroe, 1995; Platow, 2002) is about the do’s and don’ts of planning a presentation, preparing the hand-outs and the PowerPoint slides, and the delivery skills needed to capture and sustain the attention of the audience rather than about the language forms to achieve those goals. While it is true that giving presentations, including presentations in academic contexts, is a public speaking event and as such it is perceived by students as a somewhat formal event (the participants in this study, for example, were usually dressed up for their presentations and appeared to have carefully rehearsed both their presentations and the accompanying visuals), in reality, many of the language choices L1 presenters make, at least in the U.S., seem to be influenced by the less formal registers (e.g., conversation and fiction) rather than the formal ones (e.g., academic writing). This trend becomes more apparent when we look at the distribution of semantic subcategories throughout the L1 corpus in light of the communicative functions they fulfill and in comparison with Biber et al.’s (1999) findings. Looking at the frequency of distribution of the three main classes of adverbials, circumstance adverbials were the most frequently used class, accounting for $71 \%$ of the total number of adverbials in the L1 corpus and $68 \%$ in the L2 corpus, followed by linking adverbials ( $16 \%$ in the L1 corpus and $24 \%$ in the L2 corpus) and stance adverbials ( $1 3 \%$ in the L1 corpus, $8 \%$ in the L2 corpus). Thus, it was noticeable that the general trend of the frequency of the three classes was the same across both corporadi.e. the circumstance adverbials were more frequent than the linking, and the linking more frequent than the stancedbut the fact that the circumstance adverbials clearly dominated in both corpora seems to indicate the greater functional importance student presenters placed on this adverbial class compared to the other two classes.

The analysis of the sub-categories of circumstance adverbials in both corpora (see Table 3) showed that the two most frequently used subcategories by the NSs were those of place and time, followed by the contingency adverbials, while for the NNSs, the two subcategories with the highest frequency were contingency and time adverbials, followed by place adverbials. Given the fact that all coded adverbials included only structurally correct adverbials, this is an interesting finding, especially in light of Biber et al.’s (1999) study. In brief, the researchers used a corpus of 40 million words reflecting the use of American and British English across four distinct registersdconversation, fiction, newspaper language, and academic prosedwhere register distinctions were based on mode of delivery, interactiveness, communicative purpose, audience, etc. rather than on linguistic features. The idea behind this choice of characteristics was based on the argument that language use is strongly influenced by mode (e.g., spoken vs. written), the degree of interactiveness a mode of delivery allows, and the situational characteristics of language use which, respectively, mark differences in the use of different grammatical features across the registers. It should be noted here that the analysis of academic prose in their study was based on written academic prose; thus, the comparison between their findings and the findings from this study will outline some differences between spoken and written academic discourse, which may largely be intuitive to us, yet not well researched.

# 3.2.1. Circumstance adverbials

It was not surprising that both groups of participants employed a large number of circumstance adverbials, since this class allows for a great variety of circumstantial information to be encoded in a presentation de.g., the place, time, and duration of events; the temporal relationships between events; the manner and agents of processes; the causes, reasons, conditions and results, to name some of the meanings both NSs and NNSs considered important to include in their prepared discourse. Since all presentations were satisfying some course requirement, which demanded from the participants to do some independent research on a topic of interest to them, evidently, all presenters felt they needed to give sufficient information about the circumstances regarding their topics that would add to the explanation of the issues they had chosen to discuss. What is more interesting, however, is that the different dominant subcategories of adverbials in the L1 and L2 corpus possibly reflect differences in the perception of the level of formality of the academic presentation. Biber et al. (1999), for instance, found that from the category of circumstance adverbials, the four most commonly used subcategories across the registers are time, place and process adverbials, with time and place dominating conversation, and only process dominating written academic prose. Indeed, time and place were overwhelmingly used by the NSs, accounting for almost $50 \%$ of the circumstance adverbials in the L1 corpus, which seems to show the conversational, or rather interactive, nature of the NSs’ presentations.

Table 3 Frequency of Circumstance Adverbials.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="6">CIRCUMSTANCE ADVERBIALS</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Category</td><td rowspan="2">Subcategory</td><td colspan="2">L2 corpus</td><td colspan="2">L1 corpus</td></tr><tr><td>Raw frequency</td><td>Frequency per 10,000 words</td><td>Raw frequency</td><td>Frequency per 10,000 word:</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">1. Place Adverbial</td><td>Position</td><td>348</td><td>115</td><td>484</td><td>160</td></tr><tr><td>Direction</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>18</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Distance</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>2</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>348</td><td>115</td><td>504</td><td>167</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">2. Time Adverbials</td><td>Temporal relationship</td><td>49</td><td>16</td><td>30</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>Position in time</td><td>244</td><td>81</td><td>172</td><td>57</td></tr><tr><td>Duration</td><td>46</td><td>15</td><td>35</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Frequency</td><td>80</td><td>26</td><td>88</td><td>29</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>419</td><td>138</td><td>325</td><td>108</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">3. Process Adverbials</td><td>Manner</td><td>196</td><td>65</td><td>155</td><td>51</td></tr><tr><td> Means</td><td>33</td><td>11</td><td>11</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Instrument</td><td>22</td><td>7</td><td>11</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Agentive</td><td>32</td><td>11</td><td>39</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>283</td><td>94</td><td>216</td><td>72</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="6">4. Contingency Adverbials</td><td> Reason/Cause</td><td>178</td><td>59</td><td>110</td><td>36</td></tr><tr><td>Purpose</td><td>88</td><td>29</td><td>70</td><td>23</td></tr><tr><td>Concession</td><td>26</td><td>9</td><td>25</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Condition</td><td>122</td><td>40</td><td>74</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>Result</td><td>3</td><td>1</td><td>4</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>417</td><td>138</td><td>283</td><td>93</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">5. Degree Adverbials</td><td>Amplifiers and diminishers.</td><td>43</td><td>14</td><td>85</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>43</td><td>14</td><td>85</td><td>28</td></tr><tr><td>6. Addition/Restriction Adverbials</td><td>Addition/Restriction</td><td>195</td><td>64</td><td>233</td><td>77</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Total</td><td>195</td><td>64</td><td>233</td><td>77</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="5">7. Other Adverbials</td><td>Respect</td><td>7</td><td>2</td><td>13</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Approximating</td><td></td><td></td><td>3</td><td>1</td></tr><tr><td>Amount</td><td>24</td><td>7</td><td>13</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>31</td><td>9</td><td>29</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Furthermore, of the various uses of place adverbials in the L1 corpus, the most frequent function of this subcategory, needless to say, was to refer to specific locations of events or objects, which accounted for $50 \%$ of the place adverbials. In addition to this, place adverbials were used to convey a variety of other information with reference to (1) to social structures (e.g., in society), (2) sources (e.g., into their poetry), (3) places of mutually shared with the audience experiences or specific places in the visuals where certain information was located (e.g., in class, on the last page of the handout), (4) specific sources of literature, research areas, classifications, and research topics (e.g., all over the literature), (5) mental and emotional states (e.g., in my mind). These functions indicate that the NSs were frequently trying to situate their research in a larger context by not only informing their audience about the location of events, but also creating opportunities to interact with it by guiding their peers through the information on the visuals, frequently referring to shared class experiences, and pulling threads across topics and issues previously discussed in class in trying to explain how these discussions were reflected in their projects. In other words, the NSs seemed to perceive the academic presentation as an opportunity not only to present information in a more informal way, but also to interact with the audience and keep it actively involved in their presentations.

Looking at the NNSs’ functions attributed to place adverbials (which were, actually, the third most frequent category of circumstance adverbials in the L2 corpus), one could not but notice the limited range of meanings the L2 presenters expressed by this sub-category. Of course, the adverbials of place were frequently used by the NNSs as well, but their uses were limited exclusively to the issues discussed in the presentations and not a single reference, for example, to places of mutually shared experiences with the audience which the L1 presenters frequently made. Overall, the reference to locations accounted for the overwhelming $89 \%$ of the uses of place adverbials; thus, many of the patterns found in the NSs’ presentations, particularly the ones indicating the perceived interactiveness inherent in the academic presentation, were virtually absent from the L2 datadfor instance, references to sources, to places of shared experiences or places in the visuals where certain information was located, as well as references to the presenter’s mental and emotional states. There were, however, a few sporadic instances of mentioning socially determined structures (e.g., in our society) and institutions (e.g., at Princeton university) and that almost exhausted the variety of functions.

On the other hand, the NNSs put the greatest emphasis on the class of contingency adverbials explaining more often than the NSs the reason or the cause of an event, certain conditions for something to happen, and the purpose of an event. The following excerpt is a good example of an overload of clusters of contingency adverbials that could very often be found in the L2 presentations but not in the NSs’ data.

Because [reason] if you take a lot of efforts or time to recognize the words [condition], you may not have enough time to understand. for comprehension of the of the sentence or the idea. So, if you have to be a fluent reader [condition], it’s important that you are very quick in recognizing words. When you read, sometimes words that are in the text are not even necessary, like some prepositions, some articles, because it’s so automatic that you don’t even perceive them [reason]. If they are removed from from the text [condition] you would still understand the text. Okay? Why study the ability in recognizing words? Because it’s important to be able to recognize words fast [reason] in order to have a fluent reading [purpose]. Another motivation is the language two processing. The question. they wondered if proficiency was the only factor that influenced word recognition.. I mean, if two students are proficient [condition], will they have the same ability to recognize words or it might be tied to other factors, such as the first language. [NNS]

The NNSs’ preference for contingency adverbials seems to indicate a more informative function the L2 presenters attributed to the presentation and, at the same time, suggesting a perceived higher level of formality than the NSs ascribed to the event. The most frequently used sub-category of contingency adverbials was the one for reason/cause and condition adverbials which pointed to the importance the NNSs placed on building their arguments (since both types of adverbials are important in the presentation of arguments in academic context) to the exclusion of the audience from the process. This does not mean, of course, that the L2 presenters did not keep their audience in mind. On the contrary, the attempts to walk the audience through the logic and the intricacies of their arguments as well as to give all the details and conditions under which the facts they were discussing held, speak to the L2 presenters’ involvement with the audience but at a more distant and formal level. Overall, the L2 presenters made use of noticeably more reason adverbials and attempted more often than the L1 participants to justify themselves (e.g., And since I haven’t had the time to um analyze the data yet, because I haven’t really started writing my paper yet, so I’m just gonna put here the expected results for the um um research questions that I posed earlier. [NNS]) The rest of the reason adverbials were quite evenly distributed between reasons pertaining to people and institutions (e.g., And most uh females smoke because uh they think that might help lose weight. [NNS]) or reasons associated with events or facts, frequently occurring in clusters (e.g., So um I think uh Anita Roddick made mistake because The Body Shop could earn much money because of the image of naturalism. [NNS]). Similar patterns of distribution between reasons attributable to individuals and reasons attributable to events or facts were found in the L1 corpus, but it is worth noting that the L1 presenters used 10 times more often contractions of because (e.g., cuz, cause) than the L2 presenters, which again seems to suggest a perception of a lower level of formality of the academic presentation as a speech event on the part of the L1 presenters.

Condition adverbial clausesdanother type of contingency adverbialsdwere also used more often by the L2 presenters than the L1 to mark conditions on the truth value of the argument they were making. Both groups of presenters referred more frequently to conditions related to a particular individual or people in general (e.g., This was a big conflict and if anyone knows anything about the Christian faith then you know that is a kind of a conflicting idea. [NS]) than to conditions linked to other events (e.g., Um I think it’s a split, it can be done tastefully but if it goes too far, it’ll just um produce vulgar situations. [NS]). One marked difference in the L1 and the L2 use of conditional adverbial clauses could be found in the frequency of references to conditions pertaining to the presenter himself/ herself or the audience, which contributed to developing a sense of interactive involvement in the speech event. The L1 presenters referred 5 times more frequently to either themselves (e.g., If I say ‘lawyer’, what do you think of? [NS]) or the audience (e.g., So if you think about it, you know they meant ‘to fit’.) as the main agent of a condition, which helped them build a sense of community for their peers by inviting the audience to contribute to the presenter’s attempt to make a point. These functions closely resemble what Rowley-Jolivet (2007) refers to as ‘discourse management functions’ (p. 179) in that the L1 presenters felt they needed to provide their audience with guidance about their intentions to make a point by employing politeness strategies in the interaction with their peers. The L2 presenters, on the other hand, tended to use conditionals most frequently with a refocusing function, in Rowley-Jolivet’s (2007) terms, thus engaging in more interpretative speculations about some of the claims they were discussing in their presentations and showing greater involvement with the presentation content than the audience.

The second most preferred sub-category of adverbials among all participants was the sub-category of time adverbials, in which there was a marked preference on the part of the L2 presenters for more frequent clarifications of when the discussed events occurred and not so much of their frequency or duration. Overall, the general pattern of functions time adverbials fulfilled was similar across both corporadi.e. the participants employed them most frequently to refer to a specific point in time, followed by some reference to the present and past. However, interestingly, the L2 use of time adverbials that referred to some specific point in time of occurrence of the discussed events (e.g., date, month, year, age, the beginning or end of an event, etc.) was twice higher than that of the NSs, which seems to underscore the highly informative and detailed focus the NNSs maintained, sometimes unnecessarily, in their presentations (e.g., And uh that was very uncommon in nineteen forty two so uh in September nineteen forty two uh their like troubles started. [NNS]). Another noticeable difference between the two corpora was the NNSs’ limited repertoire to refer to the present, which was the second most frequent function attributed to time adverbials by both the L1 and L2 presentersd $90 \%$ of this function in the L2 corpus was realized by three single word adverbials, i.e. now $( 7 0 \% )$ , nowadays $( 1 4 \% )$ , and recently $( 6 \% )$ . The rest of the functions of time adverbials were to refer to: 1) simultaneously occurring events (e.g., at the same time) or 2) sequence of events (e.g., first, afterwards), 3) marking the beginning or end of an event (e.g., at the end of the nineteenth century um and uh at the beginning of the twentieth century), 4) references to unspecific time (e.g., in the future) or 5) historical periods of time (e.g., in ancient time).

Quite unexpectedly, process adverbials were the fourth/fifth most common adverbial sub-category in the L2 and L1 corpora, respectivelydoverall, more frequent in the L2 than the L1 data. Regarding this sub-category, Biber et al. (1999) commented that while process adverbials could be found across all registers, they stood out only in written academic prose as they are typically used to give details about how things are done (with respect to manner, instruments or means, and agents) as well as to provide description of the results of a process. Overall, in my data, this subcategory was dominated by manner adverbials, while adverbial references to agents, instruments and means were fairly infrequent. A greater number of manner adverbials were found in the L2 corpus and the analysis of their functions showed similarities between the L1 and L2 presenters in the frequency of references to the manner in which other people influenced a certain course of action (e.g., And then by protecting their copyright they can motivate them to create new products. [NNS]) or the manner in which the presenters themselves delved into the research on the topic of their presentation (e.g., So I was fascinated with identity um and I wanted I wanted to go deeper into identity. [NS]). However, there were marked differences between the two groups in the frequency of references to shared experiences as well as the way things changed in a certain process. Again, the L1 presenters made twice as many adverbial references to the audience than the L2 presenters (e.g., And as you can probably guess from the title of this project, um I based this study on Kanno’s book that we’ve been reading uh throughout the semester. [NS]), which was another indication of the higher audience-presenter involvement the NSs maintained. The NNSs, however, put stronger emphasis on the way certain actions triggered changes in a given process (e.g., And then based on the single European Act from 1986 and the Treaty of Euro 1992 they created the EMU. [NNS]), which underscored their greater concern with the presentation of the facts than the interactiveness of the presentation event, for example. The NNSs also had a greater preference to indicate the means (e.g., Um by using internet we can communicate very easily. [NNS]) and the instrument of an action (e.g., A flapper is was a girl who used to wear a short dress, shapeless, they used to uh smoke cigarettes with a long holder, and they had a flat chest. [NNS]), which probably stemmed from their assumed responsibility to add as much detail as possible in describing processes. This is not to suggest that the L1 presenters were not concerned with the process details while the L2 presenters were overwhelmed. It only implies the L2 presenters’ greater disposition to discuss the way processes unfolded, rather than make an attempt to acknowledge the audience as a participant in the discourse, and in that they brought the level of formality of their presentations close to written academic prose.

Finally, the use of diminishers and amplifiers as well as additive and restricting adverbials also deserves a mention since both groups significantly differed not so much in the language choices they made to express same ideas but in the frequency of using these sub-categories. By and large, both sub-categories of circumstance adverbials are typical of the conversational register and barely used in written academic prose (Biber et al., 1999), which can be explained by the more dynamic nature of the face-to-face interaction compared to the other registers. Being truthful to the perceived interactive function of the academic presentation, the L1 students used more frequently both adverbial sub-classes than the L2 students. In general, the primary semantic purpose of these adverbials was: 1) to intensify or lower the intensity of a proposition for emphatic purposes (e.g., In fact this has a lot to do with semantics. [NS]); 2) to add another piece of propositional content to the flow of information as the presentation goes (e.g., Um they’re also affected by social structure and social identities that you have for yourself as well as what other people have for you um in addition to ethnicity and group membership. [NS]); and 3) to restrict the truth value of a proposition to fewer possibilities (e.g., I thought these were interesting um points of how social dialects have changed especially over our generation. [NS]). The greatest difference between the two groups was in the NSs’ much higher frequency of amplifiers and restrictive adverbialsdthey used four times more a small number of amplifiers (e.g., a lot, more, much, and quite) and the restrictive adverbial just, which is especially common in conversation but rather infrequent in written academic prose. One possible explanation of the L1 speakers’ increased use of amplifying adverbials should be looked for in the intended emphatic effect of the propositional message they wanted to achieve, which coupled with the oral mode of discourse delivery allowed them to accentuate the semantic content of the adverbials even more by adding emphatic intonation to them. In other words, since the presentations were given before an audience of peers with whom the presenters had spent at least one semester of class time together, they probably felt more relaxed and informal in trying to capture and sustain their peer’s attention by creating intonationally and pragmatically a more dramatic effect in the information presentation. Another possibility would be to link the higher frequency to the wide range of meanings some of the adverbials belonging to both sub-categories may express. For instance, the restrictive adverbial just often combines the qualities of a restrictive, diminishing and hedging adverbial. Similarly, the adverbial really can be an amplifier, diminisher, or stance adverbial, which allows for simultaneous expression of a wider range of connotations in an informal manner. All in all, the L1 presenters took advantage of the range of meanings of these adverbials, while the L2 presenters abstained.

# 4. Conclusion

This paper presented a qualitative analysis of the circumstance adverbials and their semantic sub-categories in two corpora of student academic presentations. Overall, as pointed out elsewhere in the literature (e.g., Crawford-Camiciottoli, 2004; Hyland, 2002; Swales, 2004; Webber, 2005, etc.), the analysis of spoken academic discourse is lagging behind the attention written academic prose has received. Likewise, the analysis of student academic presentations has been so far an under-researched area in spoken academic discourse which, however, has a potential to uncover interesting features of this genre, particularly in relationship to other genres in the academic network (e.g., lectures, final project papers, seminars, conference presentations, etc.). The overall goal of this investigation was to identify the specific adverbial functions L1 and L2 English speaking students attributed to circumstance adverbials in relation to packaging the informational content of their presentations and their perceived level of formality of the genre. I need to point out here, though, that since the participants’ perceptions about certain features of the academic presentation (e.g., formality, interactiveness, informational content, etc.) were not additionally surveyed (by way of interviews or questionnaires, for instance), the speculations regarding these features that I offer in the analysis are solely based on the linguistic data. Although the two corpora were relatively small, the patterns of adverbial use were salient enough to give us some insight into the differences in functions circumstance adverbials served in the L1 and L2 presentations. It was also expected that the face-to-face channel of interaction would certainly affect the adverbial choices the participants made, so it was interesting to see how the perceived degree of interactiveness (as reflected by the functions the participants attributed to their adverbial use) of an otherwise predominantly monologic speech act would play itself out.

The findings indicated that both groups of participants used circumstance adverbials significantly more often than the other two classes of adverbials (linking and stance), thus, revealing the considerable functional importance student presenters attributed to this adverbial class. While this was not a surprise, given the great variety of circumstantial information that could be encoded with this class of adverbials, it was interesting to find that the different dominant sub-categories in the L1 and L2 corpus seemed to reflect differences between the NSs’ and NNSs’ perception of level of formality and degree of interactiveness of the genre. For example, the two most frequently used subclasses of adverbials in the L1 data were those of place and time, followed by contingency adverbials, while for the L2 students, the order of frequency was reverseddi.e., first, contingency, followed by time and place adverbials. In light of Biber et al.’s (1999) finding that time and place adverbials tend to dominate the conversational register and the overwhelming share of these adverbials in the L1 corpus, it was suggested that the order of frequency is likely to reflect NSs’ more conversational and interactive perception of the presentation compared to the NNSs. Further support to this general observation came from the detailed analysis of the adverbial functions within each subcategory, which revealed some differences in the range of functions the L1 and L2 participants ascribed to the different adverbial subclasses. For instance, the NSs were often using adverbials to place their research in a context involving the audience by creating opportunities to interact with it, by guiding their peers through the information on the visuals, by frequently referring to shared class experiences, or by bridging the informational content of their topics and previously discussed topics and issues in class. In other words, the NSs seemed to perceive the academic presentation as an opportunity not only to present information in an informal way, but also to interact with their audience and keep it actively involved in their presentations. Thus, the L1 presenters seemed to understand the primary purpose of the presentation as being not only to deliver, but also to negotiate information; hence, they managed to create more successfully an atmosphere of cooperation with the audience. By contrast, the L2 presenters used most frequently contingency adverbials and were preoccupied with explaining the reasons, causes, purposes, and the conditions of the discussed issues rather than foster a sense of empathy and in-group affiliation with the audience. In other words, they felt they needed to put their strongest emphasis on building and justifying the logic of their arguments or explaining the conditions that influenced the sequence of events, rather than interactively including their peers in the process.

One unexpected finding from the analysis was that, unlike written academic prose, where process adverbials tend to stand out (Biber et al., 1999), they accounted for as little as $13 \%$ to $16 \%$ of all circumstance adverbials in both corpora which probably reflects a difference between spoken and written mode of delivery. Again, the L2 student presenters showed a greater concern with the details and the facts of the topics than with the interactiveness of the presentation event, while the L1 presenters made twice as many adverbial references to the manner in which they approached their projects or the audience itself. Finally, the use of diminishers, amplifiers, additive, and restricting adverbials also revealed distinctive differences between the two groups that pointed to certain conversational elements the NSs more readily intertwined in their presentations than the NNSs. These adverbials lowered the level of formality of the L1 presentations and can safely be interpreted as intentionally and purposefully used to that effect.

On a final note, the analysis of the different functions the L1 and L2 student presenters attributed to circumstance adverbials offered in this paper should not be taken to suggest that the NS presenters provided the ‘model’ which the NNS presenters should follow. In fact, each presentation had its own merits and, as a whole, it was evident that all presenters had put a good amount of effort to research carefully their topics, prepare their presentations, and communicate clearly their ideas to their peers. The main purpose of this analysis was to identify possible differences between the two groups in their adverbial uses which L2 student presenters should be made aware of in their EAP/ESP language training, in case they may want to expand their adverbial repertoires with functions typical of the mode of delivery of this genre and not so much of place of deliverydacademic setting. Additionally, looking at the NNSs’ adverbial functions, one could not but notice the limited range of meanings the L2 presenters ascribed to some subcategories (e.g., place adverbials) which were primarily limited to the information discussed in the presentations, with few attempts to address the audience in their presentations. Also, we should not overlook the NNSs’ limited repertoire to refer to different temporal planes, for instance, or their unnecessary use of clusters of same categories of adverbials (e.g., contingency or time adverbials) in an attempt to maintain a highly informative focus throughout their presentations. In this connection, teaching the variety of functions circumstance adverbials can serve in a presentation to shape its informational content and create interactional effects should form an integral part of any ESP/EAP course tailored to the needs of NNS students pursuing or intending to pursue an academic degree. This becomes even more pressing a need when L2 students are admitted into tertiary level programs in English speaking countries where they are expected to show immediately a reasonable degree of familiarity with a variety of academic genres. In light of the present discussion of student academic presentations, I should say that, on the one hand, it is not reasonable to expect that L2 students will simply ‘pick up’ the features associated with this oral genre on their own after having had some exposure to it. On the other hand, it is important to consider the possibility that many of their language choices (including the use of adverbials) may strongly be affected by factors such as their previous English language instruction, where written genres may have been privileged over speech, or by their cultural frame of the academic presentation as a speech act. In that sense, it is very possible that the L2 presentations were based on a written script which, in effect, brought them closer to written academic prose and made them less conversational and interactive. It might also have been the case that the different adverbial choices made by the two groups of presenters reflected different statuses or identities they assumed of themselves in relation to their peers and instructors. In either event, the study of student academic presentations highlights the importance of further investigation into this genre (particularly, as part of the academic network of genres) which seems to be characterized by its own set of features, shared across a speaking/writing continuum. Thus, further corpus-based research should contribute to our better understanding of what actually makes a student academic presentation a good presentation, above and beyond its content.

# Acknowledgments

This research was largely supported by Morley Scholarship awarded to me in 2006 by the English Language Institute (ELI) at the University of Michigan. I would like to thank everybody in ELI for their generous support and for allowing me to use the Institute’s resources for this project. Special thanks should go to Professor John Swales (Professor Emeritus, University of Michigan) for his valuable guidance and advice in the process of researching and discussing some of the issues I tried to address in this paper. Appreciation is also owed to the anonymous reviewers and the editor of Journal of English for Academic Purposes for their constructive comments on an earlier version of the manuscript.

# Appendix A. Situational Descriptive characteristics

<html><body><table><tr><td>opica</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Student&#x27;s Standingb</td><td>Class sizec</td><td>Presentation timed</td><td>Type of Visuals</td></tr><tr><td>1 corpus</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Critical Period in language acquisition</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UG</td><td>19</td><td>7 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>2. The Language of Poetrye</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UG</td><td>19</td><td>9 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>3. Language and Humor</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UG</td><td>19</td><td>22 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>4. Urban Dialects</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UG</td><td>19</td><td>12 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>5. Social Dialects -- Their development and effect on our lives.</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>UG</td><td>19</td><td>13 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>6. Mother Tongue Issues in Education and</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>14</td><td>11 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>Society 7. The Many Layers of Ethnic Identities</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>14 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>8. Cross-Cultural and Interracial</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>14 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>Romantic Relationships 9. Code Switching Across Cultures</td><td></td><td></td><td>14</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>10. Identity Issues</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td></td><td>14 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>9 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>11. The origin of names</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>10 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>12. The Silent Side of Communication</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>13 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>13. Revisiting Code-Switchinge</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>6 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>14. Identity from All Different Angles</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>19 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>15. The Dine&#x27; Way Sylver&#x27;s Story</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>17 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>16. Cultural Bereavement</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>14</td><td>15 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>2 corpus</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Asian American Ethnicity and Communication</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>UG</td><td>16</td><td>13 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>2. The Critical Period Hypothesis</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>9</td><td>12 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>3. Reading Research</td><td>Linguistics</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>9</td><td>21 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>4. The Use Of Camera Traps In</td><td>Intro to American</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>9</td><td>11 min.</td><td>handout</td></tr><tr><td>Estimating Jaguar Abundance And</td><td>Language and Thought</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>Topica</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Student&#x27;s Standingb</td><td>Class sizec</td><td>Presentation timed</td><td>Type of Visuals</td></tr><tr><td>5. Finding oneself in a foreign culture: A</td><td>Language and Culture</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>16</td><td>17 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>case study 6. Copyright Issues</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>27 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>7. Beautiful Mind</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>10 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>8. Manhattan Project</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>27</td><td>26 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>9. Women&#x27;s Lives During the Twenties, and Years of Change</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>7 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>10. The Euro and the Effects on the European Economy</td><td>Global Business</td><td>BG-MA</td><td>13</td><td>18 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>11. The Internet -- A Beneficial Invention. for Society?</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>27</td><td>21 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>12. Advantages and Disadvantages of</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>27</td><td>22 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>Worldwide Knowledge 13. When Nature Calls</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>27</td><td>29 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>14. European Union Economy.</td><td>Global Business</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>21 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>15. Cigarette Smoking</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>10 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr><tr><td>16. Ethics in Business</td><td>Intro to ALT</td><td>UG</td><td>13</td><td>14 min.</td><td>PowerPoint</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Topics as formulated by the presenters. b UG eundergraduate student; BG-MA e beginning (1st semester) M.A. student. c Number of students registered in that class. d Actual presentation time (Q-A time not included) based on $1 5 { - } 2 0 \ \mathrm { m i n }$ . presentation time limit set by instructors.

# References

Andeweg, B. A., deJong, J. C., & Hoeken, H. (1998). ‘‘May I have your attention?’’: exordial techniques in informative oral presentations. Technical Communication Quarterly, 7, 271e284.   
Bellert, I. (1977). On semantic and distributional properties of sentential adverbs. Linguistic Inquiry, 8(2), 337e351.   
Biber, D., Conrad, S., Reppen, R., Byrd, P., & Helt, M. (2002). Speaking and writing in the university: a multidimensional comparison. TESOL Quarterly, 36, 9e47.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written English. Harlow, Essex: Longman.   
Boyd, F. A. (1989). Developing presentation skills: a perspective derived from professional education. English for Specific Purposes, 8, 195e203.   
Buysschaert, J. (1982). Criteria for the classification of English adverbials. Brussels: Koninklijke Academie.   
Buysschaert, J. (1987). The position of English adverbials. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching (IRAL), 25, 103e117.   
Carter-Thomas, S., & Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2001). Syntactic differences in oral and written scientific discourse: the role of information structure. ASP: La Revue du GERAS, 31e33, 19e37.   
Chen, C. W. (2006). The use of conjunctive adverbials in the academic papers of advanced Taiwanese EFL learners. International Journal of Corpus Linguistics, 11, 113e130.   
Conrad, S. M. (1998). The importance of corpus-based research for language teachers. System, 27, 1e18.   
Crawford-Camiciottoli, B. (2004). Interactive discourse structuring in L2 guest lectures: some insights from a comparative corpus-based study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3, 39e54.   
Diessel, H. (2005). Competing motivations for the ordering of main and adverbial clauses. Linguistics, 43, 449e470.   
Dubois, B. (1980a). The genre and structure of biomedical speeches. Forum Linguisticum, 5, 140e168.   
Dubois, B. (1980b). The use of slides in biomedical speeches. The ESP Journal, 1, 45e50.   
Dubois, B. (1982). ‘‘And the last slide please’’: regulatory language function atbiomedical meetings. World Language English, 1, 263e268.   
Grice, G. L., & Skinner, J. F. (1995). Mastering public speaking. Boston, MA: Allyn & Bacon.   
Gronbeck, B. E., German, K., Ehninger, D., & Monroe, A. H. (1995). Principles of speech communication. New York, NY: Harper Collins College Publishers.   
Hawkins, J. (2000). The relative order of prepositional phrases in English: going beyond manner-place-time. Language Variation and Change, 11, 231e266.   
Hinkel, E. (2003). Adverbial markers and tone in L1 and L2 students’ writing. Journal of Pragmatics, 35(7), 1049e1068.   
Hoye, L. (1997). Adverbs and modality in English. London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Genre: language, context, and literacy. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, 22, 113e135.   
Jackendoff, R. S. (1972). Semantic interpretation in generative grammar. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Magin, D., & Helmore, P. (2001). Peer and teacher assessments of oral presentation skills: how reliable are they? Studies In Higher Education, 26, 287e298.   
Mauranen, A. (2001). Reflexive academic talk: observations from MICASE. In R. Simpson, & J. Swales (Eds.), Corpus linguistics in North America: Selections from the 1999 symposium (pp. 165e178). Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Mauranen, A. (2002). ‘A good question’: expressing evaluation in academic speech. In G. Cortese, & P. Riley (Eds.), Domain-specific English: Textual practices across communities and classrooms (pp. 115e140). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
MonoConc Pro Version 2.0. [Computer Software]. Athelstan.   
Parsons, T. (1990). Events in the semantics of English: A study in subatomic semantics. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Platow, M. (2002). Giving professional presentations in the behavioral sciences and related fields: A practical guide for the novice, the nervous, and the nonchalant. New York, NY: Psychology Press.   
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, G., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language. London: Longman.   
Reinhart, S. M. (2002). Giving academic presentations. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Rowley-Jolivet, E. (1999). The pivotal role of conference papers in the network of scientific communication. ASP: La Revue du GERAS, 23e26, 176e196.   
Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2007). A genre study of if in medical discourse. In K. Flottum (Ed.), Language and discipline perspectives on academic discourse (pp. 189e214). Cambridge Scholars Press.   
Simpson, R. (2004). Stylistic features of spoken academic discourse: the role of formulaic expressions. In U. Connor, & T. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the Professions: Perspectives from Corpus Linguistics (pp. 37e64). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Simpson, R. C., & Swales, J. M. (Eds.). (2001). Corpus linguistics in North America: Selections from the 1999 symposium. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge. England: University of Cambridge Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2001). Metatalk in American academic talk: the cases of ‘point’ and ‘thing’. Journal of English Linguistics, 29, 34e54.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Thompson, S. (2002). As the story unfolds: the uses of narrative in research presentations. In E. Ventola, C. Shalom, & S. Thompson (Eds.), The language of conferencing (pp. 147e167). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Vassileva, I. (2002). Speaker-audience interaction: the case of Bulgarians presenting in English. In E. Ventola, C. Shalom, & S. Thompson (Eds.), The language of conferencing (pp. 255e276). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Ventola, E., Shalom, C., & Thompson, S. (Eds.). (2002). The language of conferencing. Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Wasow, T. (1997a). Remarks on grammatical weight. Language Variation and Change, 9, 81e105.   
Wasow, T. (1997b). End weight from speaker’s perspective. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 26, 347e361.   
Webber, P. (2005). Interactive features in medical conference monologue. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 157e181.   
Weissberg, B. (1993). The graduate seminar: another research-process genre. English for Specific Purposes, 12, 23e36.