# Methodology in EAP: Why is it largely still an overlooked issue?

Douglas E. Bell

School of Education & English, Universty of Notingham Ningbo China (Unnc), 199 Taikang East Road, 315100, Ningbo, Chin

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Methodology   
Pedagogy   
Teaching approaches Knowledge transfer Classroom practice

In 2003 it was suggested that insufficient attention had been paid to methodology and pedagogy in EAP and that there had been an over-emphasis on the what' at the possible expense of the how'. While conferences and other professional events have gone some way towards addressing this issue, in terms of EAP journal outputs, as a survey of the Journal of English for Academic Purposes (JEAP) shows, not very much seems to have changed. The pages of JEAP still suggest a dearth of research interest in issues related to EAP methodology. This paper argues that much greater prominence should be given to methodological matters in EAP, not least because teaching accounts for the bulk of what most EAP practitioners do. The paper further suggests that the transfer of pedagogical practices from mainstream ELT to EAP should perhaps be considered a little more critically than has hitherto been the case.

# 1. Introduction

Writing some 18 years ago now, in the second edition of what was then the newly emerged Journal of English for Academic Purposes (JEAP), Richard Watson Todd (2003) suggested that the literature on EAP up until that time had ben more concerned with the what of EAP, .. its content, rather thanthe how .., its teching approaches and methodology. He duly went on o idenify what he claimed were six specific pedagogical approaches to EAP, concluding his article with the argument that more emphasis should be placed on methodology in EAP, or as he chose to frame it, TEAP.

As I was a practicing EAP teacher at that time myself, the ideas that Watson Todd had expressed resonated very strongly with me. I felt that his article was seminal in drawing attention to an area, which I alo belied the mainstream journal literature had generally overlooked. Although there was certainly no shortage of journal articles examining the raw language of EAP texts (the what), it did seem very clear that there had been a noticeable lack of articles dealing with the ways in which individual teachers might then approach the teaching of such textsi their classrooms (the how). One might also have claimed that insuficient attention had been paid to EAP practitioners themselves, an issue which has elsewhere been termed the who (Bell 2016). Some five years on, this latter point continues to find an echo in the more recent work of Kaivanpanah et al. (2021), who also propose that there has been a lesser research focus on EAP teachers' and that this area seems to have been largely neglected' (2021: 2).

The aim of this current paper, however, is to set out three main proposal for consideratio. Firstly, that despite the pleas outined in Watson Todd's, 2003 paper about there being a need for more action, methodological matters in the EAP classroom have remained an under-represented area f rearch interest in P. Scondly, that investigting the resons for thi s itef topic worthy of attention and finall, that some of the methodological and pedagogical approaches typicall seen as exemplifying good practice in mainstream ELT may well need to be evaluated rather more critically when they are transferred to teaching in EAP contexts.

# 2. 2002: the start of a new era for EAP?

As background to the first proposal, it is worth remembering that the emergence of JEAP in 2002 had marked a major historical watershed in the development of EAP. Prior to its launch, there had ben no single mainstream journal dedicated solely to EAP. Most articles dealing with EAP-related matters at that time had tended to appear in periodicals with a broader readership and focus, such as the ELTJ and the ESPJ. In the wake of Todd's article, it was therefore not unreasonable to expect that subsequent editions of JEAP might see some vigorous academic debate on the issues he had raised.

Somewhat surprisingly, this largely seemed not to happen. Apart from an articl on EAP methodology in Africa by John Holmes (2004) and then an article on syllabus design by Lynn Flowerdew (2005) it seemed that as far as journal articles published in JEAP were concerned, the ssue of methodology in EAP had once again largely disappeared from the readership's collective radar screen. Re-visiting thi from a more contemporary perspective, it i evident that almost two decades on from Todds publication, the apparent dearth of JEAP research article interest in EAP methodology and classroom pedagogy persists.

In evidencing this claim, readers are invited to carry out Boolean keyword searches using the JEAP search engine for EAP methodology' or "EAP pedagogy" and see what results this brings. Recent such keyword searches of my own using these terms generated a rather meagre 11 hits for the former and 68 for the latter.

Tables 1 and 2 below list these results consecutively, the first table dealing with \*EAP methodology", the second with EAP pedagogy". As the number of hits for methodology was very smal (11), Table1 lis every artice. In the case f "AP pedagogy", due to current space constraints, Table 2 only includes the Top 40. The shading f row 19 in Table 2identifies an article which has ben further cateorized as a Researching AP Practice submission, a relatively new feature of JEAP, which will be iscussed in more detail below.

When analyzing these results, several points can be made. In the case of EAP methodology, perhaps the first and most obvious conclusion to be drawn is that the low numbers speak for themselves in terms of supporting my claim that this area has attracted very little research interes from the JEAP readership. Only 11 outputs in 18 years represents an exceptionally weak outcome by any reckoning. There are, however, a few other surprises. The first is the preponderance of articles from Iran [artices 2, 3, 5 and 11]. Collectively, these account for $3 6 \%$ $[ \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } = 4 / 1 1 ]$ , in other words more than a third of the total submissions. If submissions 6 and 7 are discounted on the grounds that they are not research artce (6 is an editorial and 7 is a news announcement from BALEAP), then this percentage rises even higher $( 4 4 \% )$ $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } = 4 / 9 )$ . While it would be premature to draw any hard and fast conclusions from these numbers, one might speculate that a research interest in methodology is perhaps more likely to occur in locations where EAP's emergence has been relatively recent. The second surprise i that the JEAP article I have already mentioned by Lynn Flowerdew from 2005 (Inte grating traditional and critical approaches to syllbus design: the what', the how' and the why?) did not make the cut. Given that Flowerdew directly cross-eferenced several of Todd's earier points from 2003, the absence of her article from these rankings stands out and is noteworthy omission It i also a littl strange to se Todd's articl itself appearing in fourth place, when the submissions ranked 1-3 all appeared after his work and were dealing with methodology less explicitly.

Compared with \*EAP methodology", as the results listed in Table 2 suggest, the situation with articles grouped under EAP pedagogy" is perhaps alittle more encouraging. However, there are aso some surrise here. The firsti the proportionally quit large number of Book Reviews (items 8, 14, 15, 19, 22, 23, 26 and 27) which represent one fifth of the total Top 40 submissions $( { \bf n } = 8 / 4 0 =$ $2 0 \%$ . If these results are discounted from the current analysis on the grounds that they are not research articles, then the number of submissions dealing with EAP pedagogy becomes rather lower. If other generic submissions such as eitorial, commentaries and calls for proposals are also removed (items 12, 13, 16, 20, 21, 24, 30 and 39 respectively) then the hits for \*EAP pedagogy" drop even further. This shows that of the Top 40 submissions generated by the Boolean search, only 24 of them are in fact bona fide research articles. This further supports my point that EAP pedagogy has received little attention in the JEAP research literature.

A further surprise when analyzing these search results is the nearly complete absence of articles for categorization under

Table 1 Total number of hits [11] based on the Boolean keyword search, "EAP methodology".   

<html><body><table><tr><td>#</td><td>Year</td><td>Title</td><td>Author(s)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>2004</td><td>Intertextuality in EAP: an African context</td><td>J. Holmes</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>2018</td><td>Exploring the cognitions and practices of Iranian EAP teachers in teaching the four language skills</td><td>M. R. Atai 1. R. Taherkhani</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>2008</td><td>Developing a profile of the ESP needs of Iranian students: The case of students of nursing and midwifery</td><td>G. Mazdayasna</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>2003</td><td>EAP or TEAP?</td><td>M. H. Tahririan 1. R.W. Todd</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>2018</td><td>Problematizing EAP education in Iran: A critical ethnographic study of educational, political, and sociocultural roots</td><td>M. Tavakoli M. Tavakol</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>2004</td><td>Editorial</td><td>1. L. Hamp-Lyons</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>2002</td><td>BALEAP</td><td>J. Godfrey</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>2016</td><td>The learning never ends&#x27;: Exploring teachers&#x27; views on the transition from General English to EAP</td><td>G. C. Campion</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>2013</td><td>Critical English for academic purposes: Building on learner, teacher, and program strengths</td><td>K.A. Helmer</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>2020</td><td>Addressing the research gap in teacher training for EMI: An evidence-based teacher education proposal in monolingual</td><td>M. L. P. Canado</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>2017</td><td>contexts Exploring Iranian ESP teachers&#x27; subject-related critical incidents</td><td>M. R. Atai H. Nejadghanbar</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4">The Top 40 articles from a total of 68 hits based on the Boolean keyword search, *EAP pedagogy&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td># 1</td><td>Year 2007</td><td>Title Issues in creating a corpus for EAP pedagogy and research.</td><td>Author(s) R. Krishnamurthy</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2015</td><td></td><td>I. Kosem E. Cotos</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td></td><td>Furthering and applying move/step constructs: Technology-driven marshalling of Swalesian genre theory for EAP pedagogy</td><td>S. Huggman S. Link</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>2007</td><td>Learner corpora: The missing link in EAP pedagogy</td><td>G. Gilguin S. Granger</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>2019</td><td> Phrases in EAP academic writing pedagogy: Iluminating Halliday&#x27;s influence on research and practice</td><td>M. Paguot D. Oakey</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>2021</td><td>Beyond comprehension: Reading requirements in first-year undergraduate courses</td><td>A. Ismayilli Karakoc R. Ruegg</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>2020</td><td>Undergraduate student academic writing in English-medium higher education: Explorations through the ROAD-MAPPING</td><td>P. Gu E. Dafouz</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>2004</td><td>lens Creativity, students&#x27; academic writing, and EAP: exploring comments on writing in an English language degree</td><td>D. Allison</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>2013</td><td>programme Where from, who, why and how? A study of the use of sources by first year L2 university students</td><td>C. Thompson</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>2021</td><td>BOOK REvIEw: Educational Change amongst English Language College Teachers in China: Transitioning from Teaching</td><td>J. Morton N. Storch N. Long</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>2021</td><td>for General to Academic Purposes Applying local grammars in EAP teaching</td><td>J. Zhang L. Zhang</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>2012</td><td>Investigating the relationship between the use of English for academic purposes and academic attainment</td><td>H. Su J. P. Donohue</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td></td><td></td><td>E. J.Erling</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>2013 2007</td><td>Corpus tools in EAP: A response to Davies (2013) Editorial</td><td>V. Brezina P. Thompson</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>2006</td><td>Call for Proposals BOOK REvIEw: English for Academic Purposes (EAP) in Asia: Negotiating Appropriate Practices in a Global Context</td><td> No author</td></tr><tr><td>15 16</td><td>2015 2020</td><td>BOOK REvIEw: Advances in Corpus-based Research on Academic Writing: Effects of discipline, register, and writer</td><td>L. Gurney Y. Zou</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>expertise</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td>2018</td><td>Editorial</td><td>P. Thompson</td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td>2020</td><td> Transition markers in EAP textbooks</td><td>M. Walkova</td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td>2021</td><td>Looking past limiting conditions: Prioritizing meaning in EAP.</td><td>3. J.W. Marr</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>2020</td><td> BOOK REvIEw: Academic discourse and global publishing: Disciplinary persuasion in changing times</td><td>F. Mahmood</td></tr><tr><td>21</td><td>2011</td><td>In this issue</td><td>C. Perez-Llantada No author</td></tr><tr><td>22 23</td><td>2007</td><td>Volume contents, author and keyword index, Volume 6, (2007) BOOK REvIEw: English for academic purposes: Approaches and implications</td><td>No author</td></tr><tr><td>24</td><td>2018 2012</td><td>BOOK REVIEW: EAP Essentials: A Teacher&#x27;s Guide to Principles and Practice.</td><td>K. L. Lin P. Thomas</td></tr><tr><td>25</td><td>2009</td><td>Editorial</td><td>P. Thompson</td></tr><tr><td>26</td><td>2011</td><td> Self-efficacy and academic listening</td><td>S. Graham</td></tr><tr><td>27</td><td>2016</td><td>BOOK REvIEw: The Routledge handbook of English for academic purposes.</td><td>L. Blaj-Ward</td></tr><tr><td>28</td><td>2016</td><td>BOOK REvIEw: Power and meaning making in an EAP classroom: Engaging with the everyday</td><td>C. Neculai</td></tr><tr><td>29</td><td>2012</td><td>Genres and registers of student report writing: An SFL perspective on texts and practices</td><td>S. Gardner</td></tr><tr><td>30</td><td>2020</td><td>Lexical bundles in theses, articles, and textbooks of applied linguistics: Investigating intradisciplinary uniformity and</td><td>M. Shirazizadeh</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>variation</td><td>R. Amirfazlian</td></tr><tr><td>31</td><td>2015</td><td>Editorial: The past and possible futures of genre analysis: An introduction to the special ssue</td><td>Z. Lancaster</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>L. Aull M. D. Perales</td></tr><tr><td>32</td><td>2010</td><td>Facilitating writing from sources: A focus on both process and product.</td><td>Escudero T. Dovey</td></tr><tr><td>33</td><td>2021</td><td>Exploring polysemy in the Academic Vocabulary List: A lexicographic approach.</td><td>S. Skoufaki B. Petric</td></tr><tr><td>34</td><td>2013</td><td>Developing the Academic Collocation List (ACL) - A corpus-driven and expert-judged approach</td><td>K. Ackermann Y-H. Chen</td></tr><tr><td>35</td><td>2021</td><td>Syntactic complexity across academic research article part-genres: A cross-disciplinary perspective</td><td>J. E. Casal X. Lu</td></tr><tr><td>36</td><td>2018</td><td>Exploring the cognitions and practices of Iranian EAP teachers in teaching the four language skills</td><td>G. Zhang M. R. Atai</td></tr><tr><td>37</td><td>2018</td><td>Corpus-assisted editing for doctoral students: More than just concordancing</td><td>R. Taherkhani M. Charles</td></tr><tr><td>38</td><td>2019</td><td>&quot;I won&#x27;t publish in Chinese now&#x27;: Publishing, translation, and the non-English speaking academic</td><td>N. Luo</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Singapore</td><td>S. Khoo</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>39</td><td>2020</td><td>An investigation into the learning transfer of English for specific Academic Purposes (ESAP) writing skills of students in</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>C. Hill</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>K. Hyland</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 (continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>#</td><td>Year Title</td><td></td><td>Author(s)</td></tr><tr><td>40</td><td>2018</td><td>Editorial: Gender and academic writing</td><td>T. Lillis</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3"></td><td></td><td>J. McMullan</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>J. Tuck</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Researching EAP Practice' This specific genre of article submission was inroduced by JEAP from volume 21 onwards in alaudable effort to narrow the gap between research and practice and to encourage more submissions from claroom-based practitioners. As the results in Table 2 show, however, only 1 submission (number 19) in the Top 40 listings belongs to this strand. Furthermore, no such articles appear in the remaining 28 hits generated by the search under "EAP pedagogy" as a whole $( \mathtt { n } = 4 0 + 2 8 = 6 8 )$ . This suggests that even when they are being expressly encouraged to do so, most of the authors currently submitting artice to JEAP are not focusing on EAP practice or classoom pedagogy. While one might concede that asmall number of artices in JEAP do sometimes include a closing section on pedagogical ramifications, it must also be said that this practice is not consistent.

When examining the 68 hits for EAP pedagogy' one further point is worth mentioning and that is how these results have been ranked in terms of their relevane. i not cler for example, why  ll rearh articleon AP pdgogy uch s that sumite y Ma and Hu in 2019 (Graduate-level research writing instruction: Two Chinese EAP teachers localized EP genre-based pedagogy') and which was ranked as number 56, should be appearing much lower down the list than the Book Reviews and Editorial submissions already mentioned.

In the time-honored tradition of saving the biggest surprise to the last, the final point worth raising about the Boolean search results for \*EAP pedagogy' is perhaps not so much what these results included, but what they evidently eft out. A series of more general trawls through the JEAP archives threw up some other articles [11] which evidently do deal with EAP pedagogy, but which for some reason failed to be detected and classified as such by a Bolean search using that term. These are detailed in Table 3 below. As before. the shading indicates an artice from the Researching EAP Practice category of submission. As these results have been compiled based on a series of different searches, this time there is no ranking.

Given the apparent relevance of their content matter, the omission of these article is surprising, particularly for those submissions where direct mention was made of pedagogy in the article tite (e.g. items a,c, and j) and especially with the Swales and Post article (item a) which was evidently explicitly seking to link research with pedagogy. As an aside, i is pehaps worth pointing out that also conducted non-Bolean keyword searches using the terms EAP methodology and EAP pedagogy, which resulted in a vastly expanded 375 its for the former nd 468 for th lter Intetingly, the11 missing artices dd then ially apar, albeit in some caes quite a long way down the ranking list. While it i certainly not the main purpose of this article to challenge or critique JEAP's search engine mechanisms, these later findings do raise some interesting questions about how submissions are being categorized and ranked in terms of their subject relevance.

Having stated all of the above though, I must alo stres that I am not in any way trying to denigrate the overall qualit of JEAP as a journal, nor am I intending to be critical of the present or past JEAP editorship. Editors can only work with the material they receive after all and based on my own forays into the world of journal editing, strongly suspect that the submissions to JEAP dealing with methodology and pedagogy remain vastly outnumbered by those focusing on other topic areas. However, even if we allow for the fact that the international readership of JEAP represents both classroom-based practitioners and researchers, given that most people involved in EAP stilltend to work as teachers, the apparent dearth of professional research interest in the theory and practice of EAP teaching which my results suggest,strikes me as both counter-intuitive and odd. As Watson Todd (2003: 154) had originally commented, it i amost a if the how of EAP and methodological matters end up gting treatd as an afterthought Itis worth considering why this might be so.

Table 3 Articles (1) which ppear to e eleant for methodology and pedagogy, but which failed to be generated by Boolean seches under eiter EAP Methodology" or "EAP Pedagogy".   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item</td><td>Year</td><td>Title</td><td>Author(s)</td></tr><tr><td>a</td><td>2017</td><td>Student use of imperatives in their academic writing: How research can be pedagogically applied</td><td>J. M. Swales 3. J. Post</td></tr><tr><td>b</td><td>2016</td><td>Exploring teachers&#x27; practices and students&#x27; perceptions of the extensive reading approach in EAP reading classes</td><td>E. Ro</td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td>2019</td><td>Scaffolding L2 writers&#x27; metacognitive awareness of voice in article reviews: A case study of SFL-based pedagogy</td><td>3. Y. Jou</td></tr><tr><td>d</td><td>2018</td><td>Investigating the collocations available to EAP writers</td><td>A. Frankenberg- Garcia</td></tr><tr><td>e</td><td>2017</td><td>What intercultural rhetoric can bring to EAP/ESP writing studies in an English as a lingua franca world</td><td>K. McIntosh U. Connor 4. E. Gokpinar-</td></tr><tr><td>f</td><td>2021</td><td>Training disciplinary genre awareness through blended learning: An exploration into EAP students&#x27; perceptions of online annotation of genres across disciplines</td><td>Shelton 4. P. Crosthwaite 5. A. G. Sanhueza M. Schweinberger</td></tr><tr><td>g</td><td>2020</td><td>Evaluating EAP notetaking textbooks: Eight key questions</td><td> J. Siegel</td></tr><tr><td>h</td><td>2016</td><td> Learning to argue in EAP: Evaluating a curriculum innovation from the inside</td><td>H. Salter-Dvorak</td></tr><tr><td>i</td><td>2016</td><td>&quot;There&#x27;s intentionality behind it ..&quot;: A genre analysis of EAP classroom lessons</td><td>J. J. Lee</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td> Mediation and development of a novice L2 writing teacher&#x27;s pedagogical content knowledge of genre</td><td>D. Worden</td></tr><tr><td>k</td><td>2018 2021</td><td>EAP in the expanding circle: Exploring the knowledge base, practices, and challenges of Iranian EAP practitioners</td><td>1. S. Kaivanpanah 2. S. M. Alavi 3. I. Bruce</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3. What is wrong with writing about teaching?.

Perhaps one of the possible reasons for the apparent lack of research interest in EAP methodology and pedagogy could be framed as familiarit brees contempt. fter all qualified teachers know how to teach, so why should they bother to talk about it? As Henry Widdowson (2003) has tartly commented:

Teaching is common sense; it's just like putting on your trousers. So why do we stand about disputing? Why waste time enquiring into the nature of language, the psychological process f arning, r the rlative effectivenes of different approaches to teaching? If teaching is seen as commonsensical, something that anybody can turn their hand to if they fee so disposed, then of course, not much prestige attaches to it .. This view of the language teacher is quite widespread, even among language teachers themselves .. Once knowledge becomes common property, and common sense, its mystery disappears, and there is no need to hold it in special regard.

Aside from the significant damage that this can do to the status and levels of professional respect afforded to EAP as an academic discipline (Bell 2021), the most obvious downside of such thinking is that it can al to asly lead us into not seeng the wood for the trees The act f teaching then becomes an elephant in the classroom; something that people are certainly aware of, but an activity that has itself become so commonplace they have no desire to draw explicit attention to it. If this is the case, the i istroubling on several counts. As I have suggsted above, the fact of the matter is that claroom teaching is sill what oupies most P practitioners time. Not pure language analysis not pure lingustic reearch; not arguing for rights, nor indeed challenging and trying t re-shape the entire raison dtre of ur universties. While one might argue that all hese things to a grater or esser extent have their place in EAP, surely, we should never lose sight of the fact that the day job for the majority of EAP practitioners worldwide remains teaching clases of students how to operationalize the language and skill needed for academic purposes. For this reason alone, one might expect there to be significantly more rofessional interest shown in the how of EAP and in questioning the pedagogic efficacy of what goes on in EAP classrooms.

On this note, it must be acknowledged, of course, that when looking across the discipline of EAP as a whole, there have been several international onferences, various special interest group meetings and quite a few symposia over the intervening years, each of which have examined the role f the EAP practitioner and different aspects of practice (e.g., BALEAP, 2012; BALEAP, 2016; BALEAP, 2017a, BALEAP, 2017b). It must also be conceded that as far as conference themes go, this interest has evidently continued up to the present time (e.g., BALEAP, 2021). However, as I believe my survey of the past 18 years of articles quite clearly shows, the outcomes of such events are not yet being particularly wellreflcted in the pages of journals such as JEAP. As JEAP is now the officilly recognized journal for BALEAP, an organization which is arguably the main professional body representing EAP practitioners in the UK, and as JEAP also reaches a substantial international readership, this makes the omission of such articles even more remarkable.

Returning to my reflections on why this phenomenon i occurrig in the first place though, perhaps a second reason for the lack of journal article interest in EAP pedagogy i the misguided belef that everything which needs to be said about EAP teaching has been said already and there is no longer anything new. In this regard, some of the earlier EAP literature may posibly be guilty of perpetuating a myth that more attention has been paid to methodological matters than is i fact the case. Writing in 2006, for example, in his advanced resource book for EAP, Ken Hyland stated that both methods and material had received considerableattention in the ELT and EAP litrature .with methods taking precedence (2006a: 89 my emphasis) but in the case of EAP certainly, this statement is quite difficult to substantiate. Hyland himself provides no direct supporting citations as evidence for his claim and apart from a brief mention of how corpora and computer-mediated learning might have an impact on what EAP teachers do, the bulk of that chapter in fact discusses EAP materials, not EAP methodology. To be scrupulously fair to Ken Hyland, in more recent publications (e.g., Hyland, 2018) he has since acknowledged that 'the problematization of pedagogy is stil not a mattr f regular communal discourse in the field' (Hyland, 2018, p. 395) and other recent writers (e.g., Davis, 2019) have also flagged that there is perhaps a worrisome gap developing between EAP research and EAP practice. Nonetheles, some of those earlier pronouncements on the attention paid to EAP methodology may be resonating with EAP practitioners alittle more loudly than they should. Certainly, it sems that some other recent authors have also broadly acepted this ideathat methodology in EAP has already received a lot of atention (e., Bree, 2018, p. 3) although once again, such a claim can be challenged. While it i undoubtedly true that methodology in more general TEsoL contexts has come under very close scrutiny in recent decades, (e.g., Brown, 2007; Hall 2011; Lin, 2013; Richards & Rodgers, 2014; Waters, 2009; Waters, 2012) and evidently continues to do so (e.g., Jackson & Burch, 2017; Aull 2021; Pang, 2016; Prior, 2019; Tomlinson, 2018; Vieira, 2017; Zulfikar, 2018), a fr as I am aware, none of these debates have attempted to deal with methodological matters specifically as they apply to EAP teaching.

Having just acknowledged that methodology has received considerable attention in the mainstream TEsoL literature, it i perhaps worth revisiting, if only briefl, whati is that should make AP any difernt in this regard. Perhaps the firs point tobe made here is that the academic literature on the diffrences between EAP and more generic forms of ELT is i fact now extensive (e.g., Argent &

Alexander, 2011; Campion, 2012; Bell, 2010, 2016; Ding & Bruce, 2017; Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001; Hyland, 2006b; Sharpling, 2002; Strevens, 1988). However, it might also be argued that diffrent authors have chosen to highlight and foreground specific features, depending on their own personal interests and biases. As Campion (2016) has argued, some of these claimed differences may also be vering uncomfortably close to the realm of stereotyping and there has often been a lack of empirical evidence to support some of the pronouncements being made. However, even allowing for such variances of opinion and interpretation, there does seem to be a broad consensus that one of the primary differentiating features between EAP and other forms of ELT i that fundamentally speaking, teaching in EAP contextshould be geared towards meeting pecific needs. In this regard, EAP not surprisingly shares many similarities with the broader discipline of ESP, where an analysis of needs is widely recognized as being one of the core pillrs upon which everything else then rests (Anthony, 2018). Of course, one might also reasonably argue that there are always going to be needs of some description and that previous writer (e.g., Abbott, 1981) may have been a little to hast, if not downright unfair, in assigning mainstream ELT to the so-calld TENOR (Teaching English for No Obvious Reason) box. Lots of teaching in other ELT contexts is also needs base, so if we are to avoid falig into the trap of stereotyping and setting up false dichotomies then some care does need to be taken when applying this yardstick. We would probably be on safer ground to say that in the case f EAP, itis simply that the awareness of teaching towards specific needs is more acute. Without wishing to state the obvious, this central preoccupation with nees in EAP has several important ramifications for what then happens in methodological and pedagogical practice. For a start, if teaching is to be directed towards the outcome of meeting particular needs, then it means that there will de factobe a greater sense of purpose and a heightened prioritization of what takes place in the classroom. Approaches and activities which might serve more general language learning purposes wel in a broader and les-presured environment, may now have to be discarded on the grounds that they are 'nice to have' rather than nd to have'. nother knock-on effect of teaching to meet specific nee is that the teching itsef wll become more acountable and results driven. Practitioners are also likel to become much pithier in thir evaluations of what does and does not work well. Asa further corollary of this there will be a much greater awarenes of time and how best to use it. In sum, each of the above are consequences of teaching towards a particular set of needs and each in turn then has the potential to create aditional et of consequences when it comes to choosing appropriate methodology and pedagogical approaches in the classroom.

Aside from the central positioning of needs, one other widely accepted diffrence between EAP and ELT in general concerns the nature of the learners. As various authors have commented (e.g., Alexander t al., 2008; Anthony, 2018; De Chazal, 2013) learners in an EAP environment are most typically adults, and as such, they usually have more maturity, more personal agency, and a greater sense of purpose. As adult learners, they are also not necessarily coming into the EAP classroom as a tabula rasa, as empty vessels waiting to be flled. In many EAP context, it is now accepted that the learners wil know far more about the content of their given subject discipline than the EAP practitioners teaching them (Anthony, 2018). This has important ramifications for the inherent power balance in student-teacher relationships and may well mean that in some stuations, teachers and students willneed to work together on more of an equal partnership footing. Once again, this has important methodological and pedagogical consequences for the ap. proaches techers subsequently choose to tak in ther clsrooms. llof this rereets rich potenti ground for further investigations into how methodology and pedagogy are applied in EAP..

# 4. Earlier methodological considerations in EAP

In his 2003 article, Watson Todd originally suggested that EAP places a particular emphasis on six pedagogical approaches:

1. Focus on inductive learning.   
2. Using process syllabuses.   
3. Promoting learner autonomy.   
4. Using authentic materials and tasks.   
5. Integrating technology in teaching.   
6. Using team teaching.

18 years on, i is worth looking at these approaches with fresh eyes to see if anything has changed or needs refinement.

# 4.1. Focus on inductive learning

Probably few would deny that EAP teaching tends to favour inductive approaches over deductive. Actively encouraging students to notice features of academic language and guiding their discovery of how different written genres operate each speak to an inductive learnng proces (., Swales, 990 This is not to say, f ourse, tht dductive teaching and leng have n lace in AP. There are almost certainly instances when teachers may decide to provide their students with explicit rules but encouraging students to become adept at working things out for themselves remains a dominant methodological hallmark of the EAP classrom. One particular manifestation of this can arguably be found in the practical applications of Data Driven Learning (e.g., Anthony, 2017; Charles, 2014; Charles, 2018) whereby students are encouraged to build their own EAP corpora.

# 4.2. Using process syllabuses

The role played by processyllabuses in EAP is perhaps alittle les clear cut, lagely due t some nherent ambiguity around how we might wish to define a processyllabus. In its earliest and purest form, where it was suggested that learners and teachers should be negtiaing the entire syllabus togter (.., Breen, 1984; Wilkins, 1976), I am nt so sure tht this hppns ofen ough to sa that it is now a key methodological component of EAP. Certainly, f I reflet on the last quarter century of my own career in EAP teching, process sllabuses have not played as much of a role as the more commonly found product syllabus. Whil there may be some leway for learnrs to ntiate th contnt of ht s to be covered, in mos as t sms tht A tchrs sill go into thir assms with a largely pre-determined idea f what their syllabus wl contain (Bruce, 2011). In other words, the traditioal product-based syllabus continues to hold sway. Within that broader framework however, there are undoubtedly aspects of more process-based approaches to EAP pedagogy in general (Hyland, 2006a). Though they are selfevidently not the same thing as a proces-based syllaus, process-based approaches to writing, for example, are actually very common in EAP, with students often being required to submit outines, draft, and re-drafts before they hand in thir final versions (Alexander et al., 2008). In this regard, and as a general peda gogical principle in EAP, we might conclude that process does tend to be foregrounded somewhat more than product. Whether this clam can be extended as far as approaches to EAP syllabus design though, remains open to debate. A Ian Bruce has pointed out, (2011: 59) it seems that most EAP syllabuses in fact tend to be hybrids based on an amalgamation of different approaches.

# 4.3. Promoting learner autonomy

As with inductive learning, most EAP teachers would probably recognize the promotion of learner autonomy as an inherent pedagogical principle of EAP. Much of the early study skls dimension of EAP (e.g., Waters & Waters, 1995) was certainly preoccupied with this goal and the underpinnings of promoting learner autonomy remain alie and well today, most prominently in academic skills development sessions such as how to use library resources or how to navigate online e-journals.

Many of the original tenets of genre analysis (Swales, 1990) also speak to the promotion of autonomous learners, particularly the idea of training students in aspects of linguistic analysis so that they themselves develop the capacity to become investigators and better-informed users of language. As Swales (2019) has more recently commented however, the pedagogical links between genre analysis models and their practical appication in EAP classrooms have not always been made as explicit as they might have been. As Swales laments, some of the 'studies of genre in the leading ESP/EAP journals .. fade away before offering well-articulated pedagogical applications' (2019: 78). This suggests that rather than just identifying different academic genres, there are opportunite for writers to investigate the ways in which such genres might be taught. Unpicking some of these principles evidently stil ofers pratitioners considerable scope for reearch. Inded, this may wel turn out to be an area in which more EAP contributions to the how of EAP might yet be made.

# 4.4. Using authentic materials and tasks

As EAP aims to prepare students for dealing with specific language in specific contexts and has its roots in many of the original tenets of Communicative Language Teaching (De Chazal, 2013), it should come as no great surprise that authentic materials and tasks will feature prominently in its pedagogy. Teaching that is based on a target-situation nees analysis is certainly likely to throw up instances when students wil find themselves exposed to the academic texts and language that they can expect to encounter in real academic life. Looking at the question of authenticity more holisticall, much of this in turn speaks to the importance of specificity, which has also been positioned as a core feature of EAP (e.g., Bruce, 2005; Hyland, 2002; Hyland, 2009). As part of their wider EAP training, students are also likely to find themselves engaging with authentic tasks. Taking notes from a lecture, doing a literature search, writig a discursive essy and giving an oral presentation are all example f tasks identified in the EAP literature as being highly authentic for academic ontexts (.g., Alexander et al., 2008). As other writer e.g., Bree, 1985; Mishan, 2005; Mishan, 2017; Widdowson, 2003) have cautioned however, authenticity is a much more complex notion than it first might appear and EAP teachers should not blithelyassume that authenticit of materials alone willnecessarily be suficient. While use of authentic materials and task-types does appear to be a core pedagogic feature of EAP, other considerations such as matching linguistic appropriatenes to the learners' language level and maintaining a more holistic awarenes of the intended learning outcomes should probably equally be kept in mind.

# 4.5. Integrating technology in teaching

To a greater or leser extent, call for the integration of technology and teaching now seem to permeate almost every subject in the higher catiol curricm ., Brt t al., 2020), so it i deatable whther this cannw e classfied asdefining ature of EAP pedagogy. These days, the General English classoom is just as likely to draw on technological adances as EAP (e.g., Dalal & Gulati. 2018), although the latter sill probably deals more with concordancing software and use of corpora (e.g, Gilguin et al., 2007; Krishnamurthy & Kosem, 2007). That said, with the possible exceptions of more common IT tools such as Moodle and Powerpoint, not all EAP teachers are neessaily going to beengaging with such tehnologies on a daily bas. For this rson, t is questionable whether we can continue to mark the integration of technology as a defining pedagogical component of EAP. However, given the recent emergence of Covid-19 and the efects that this has had on traditional classroom delivery, this situation may wellsoon change (Venn et al., 2020). Indee, the current worldwide need for online teaching and the various challenges that this has brought may wellforce the development of brand-new pedagogies and this will apply to EAP teaching just as much as it does any other discipline. As Crosthwaite et al. (2021) have pointed out in their recent discussion of genre-based pedagogy in blended learning, traditional pedagogical approaches to genre education may be reshaped and/or constrained by the move to a blended environment' (2021: 2). Following the switch to online EAP teaching and all the pedagogic ramifications that this brings, it i to be hoped that we will se more

discussion of such issues in future JEAP submissions.

# 4.6. Using team teaching

Watson Todd's final claim that team-teaching is distinctive pedagogical feature of EAP may now be more aspirational than actual. While team-teaching in EAP certainly exist, and while there have en some reports published in the literature (e.g., Sloan & Porter, 2009), it is deatable whether thi t is happening with suficiet frequency for it to be marked out as adefining edagogical hllmark of the discipline as a whole. In the ideal world, we certainly might wish for EAP classes to be delivered as a joint venture between subject specialists and language specilists but the paucity of discussions about team-teaching in the current EAP literature would suggest that this practice still tends to be the exception rather than the norm.

# 5. Further methodological considerations in EAP

Beyond the six pedagogic approaches identified by Watson Todd, we might also ask, are there any other distinctive features of EAP's methodology worthy of mention? In reflcting on this question, it can be worthwhil to consider some of the methodological issues that have been of concern in the history of ELT in general.

As various authors agree (e.g., Adamson, 2004; Hal, 2011; Kumaravadivelu, 2006; Prabhu, 1990; Richards & Rodgers, 2014; Waters, 2012), the methodological development of ELT has ben marked by several dichotomous pendulum swings. One of the earlest such swings concerned the role played by the students first language (L1). In the case of traditional grammar translation methodology, for example, it was believed that all intruction should be delivered in the L1. The positioning on this then changed quit dramatically with the advent of alternative methodological approaches such as The Oral Approach, which argued for a complete avoidance of the L1, insisting instead, that allinstruction and classroom interaction should henceforth be carried out only in the target language (L2) (Richards & Rodgers, 2014). With very few exceptions, this approach has continued to be adopted by successve methodologies particularly Communicative Language Teaching (CT), and of course, i stil dominate today. However, the recent emergent interest in applications of translanguaging pedagogy (e.g, Mazak, 2017; Rabbage, 2019) marks a very interesting departure from this L2-only hegemony and may wel have important pedagogical ramifications for the future teaching of EAP, particularly in the growing number of contexts where L2 teachers of English outnumber those who have the language as their L1.

A further methodological pendulum swing has concerned the roles of teachers and learners. In essence, the main thrust of the discussions here has revolved around whether clases should be teacher-centred or learner-centred. For anyone steeped in the strong version of CL (Howatt, 1984), the most typical treatment of this particular dichotmy eentialy amounts to learner-cered teaching being hailed as a virtue and teacher-centred approaches being damned as avice. In the case of EAP, however, such pedagogical matters are often not quite so black and white. Indeed, contrary to most f the prevailing ELT orthodoxie, in certain EAP teaching contexts, there may well i fact be a considerable amount of teacher-centred instruction, certainly far more than would usually be permitte in the classroom approaches prescribed on general ELT training courses such as CELTA or DELTA. However, for EAP teachers, i is worth considering whether the slaying of such sacred ELT cows should necessaril be a bad thing. In this regard, as with the question of how to approach the clasroom use of L1, several such generall accepted methodological transfers from mainstream TESOL to EAP may need to be considered rather more critically and arguably should not simply be re-applied wholesale. If we are prepared to agree that EAP sometimes draws on adiferent knowledge base and set of practitioner competencies (e.g., BALEAP, 2008; Ding & Bruce, 2017), then by the same token, surely, we must aso question the extent to which these dimensions may sometimes need to be complemented by different pedagogical approaches.

# 6. The legacies of TEFL: a plus or a minus for TEAP?

The section above has referred to methodological transfer from general ELT context to EAP and it has been suggested that this matter should not be approached uncriticlly. While there clearly are some areas of useful pedagogical overlap between mainstream ELT and EAP- as former colleague once remarked o me on this sse, at the end of the day, good teaching is good teaching it hould perhaps be more explicitly acknowledged that there are also some instances when the methodology found in other ELT contexts may not in fact be the most appropriate or efective when applied to EAP. While this general point has already been made long ago (e.g, Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001, p. 177), somewhat frustratingly, few, if indeed any such writers, have then spelled out in more pecific detail what exactly these les appropriate methodologies and approaches consist of, or how EAP practitioners might be advised to approach matter differently. Such practice-based gaps in the profesional literature represent an ideal opportunity for more research to be undertaken on EAP classroom methodology, and are of course, one of the motivations behind the arguments currntly being proposed in this paper.

Given that EAP, in UK universty contexts anyway, till recruits the lion's share of its teachers from mainstream ELT backgrounds (Lowton, 2020), the majorit of whom are likely to have done most, if not al, of their prior qualifications and traning in more generic forms of English teaching, it should come as no surprise that there may initially be sues around pedagogical and methodological transfer when teachers migrate from one to the other. Depending on the specifics of their previous teaching contexts, many teachers moving from mainstream TES0L to EAP do typically find themselves on a steep initial learning curve (Bell 2007) and other reports from the wider literature tend to bear this observation out (e.g., Elsted, 2012; Ding et al., 2004; Post 2010). It alsosems cler that the move from more general forms of ELT to EAP is ften likely to involve a certain amount of unlearning' and this can leave teachers feeling that the pedagogical rug has been pulled out from under them. In some cases, the transition from one milieu to the other can be deeply unsettling for teachers and may involve a significant r-thinking of practice and identity (Alexander, 2012). As Sue Argent and Argent and Alexander, 2011 have commented:

Trained and experienced ELT teachers sometimes report feling deskilled when they frst teach EAP. They may be unaware that the criteria they normally apply to identify needs or evaluate lessons are not necessarily the same in EAP

(Argent & Alexander, 2011)

As long as the situation remains in which teachers are recruited for EAP teaching when their previous experience and qualifications have entirely e based on the princples of mainstm , this sse f intill feeling dekilled i likely to perst. s several writers have pointed out (.g,Bl, 2007, 2016, 2018; Errey, 2001; Krzanowski, 2001; owton, 2020; Scott, 2001; Sharpling, 2002) the standard qualifications in ELT do not necessrily preare tachers very well for what they may be faced with when working in EAP. The obvious solution, of course, isfor there to be a more eficient means of preparing those with general ELT backgrounds in the more specific knowledge and skil areas deemed necessary for EAP. A bridging processlike this would presumably help to make the transition from one discipline to the other much smoother and allow new teachers to hit the ground running, rather than having to go through atrial-and-err adjustment peri0d. As has ee argued at length elsewhere (Bell 2007, 2010, 2013, 2016) i does till seem to be the case that when it comes to EAP, most new teachers often spend asignificant amount of ther time picking up the requisite AP knowledge and skill through a process of enforced on-the-job learning, rather than via any mechanisms which are more carefully planned and systematic. While there are undoubtedly some benefits to learning things as one goes and some may see this as a natural and even necessary stage in joining a community of practice (e.g., Lave & Wenger, 1991; Wenger, 1998), it i arguably not the most effective nor time-fficient means. Surely anything which can make the transition process from mainstream ELT to EAP more streamlined and les unsettling for teachers must therefore be for the greater good. This was certainly the original thinking behind the development of the Universty of Plymouth's Postgraduate Certificate in Teaching EAP (PgC TEAP) as long ago as 2005. This was the 'first UK-based course of its kind at that time and my English Language Centre colleagues and I were keen to create a credit-rated university-recognized qualification, which would help to prepare teachers experienced in other ELT contexts for the realities of employment i EAP. Although the University of Plymouth PgC TEAP has long since been relegated to the history books (see ell, 2005, 2007 for afuller decription) the emergence of similar TAP qualifications in subsequent years (e.g., the BALEAP wesit now provides a useful list of current providers: https://www.baleap.org/resources/teap-courses) suggests that there remains an important rolefor preparatory EAP-specific qualifications to play.

While a detailed discussion of this topic now falls far beyond the scope of this present paper, in contrast to the results of a very small-cale survey which suggested that teachers may not see such pre-service TEAP qualifications as useful (Campion, 2012), more recent and more extensive research (Lowton, 2020) supports the idea that EAP employers are continuing to welcome the development of such courses, although it must also be said that important questions do stil remain around aspects of their ownership, delivery mechanisms and professional reulation.  key ssue hre ses to be that fformal recogntion, and the ne for such qualifications to receive wider endorsement as gatekeepers for entry into EAP as a disciline distinct from ET. If preparatory qualifictions in EAP ever do receive this kind of rcognition and reach the same leves f universal aceptance and professional status as their counterparts in mainstream TESOL (the CELTAs and the DELTAs essentially), then one might confidently expect that some f the methodological gaps between ELT and EAP which this paper has been discussing will be sgnificantly narrowed. In the meantime, the development of more systematic approaches to EAP teacher induction programmes (e.g., O'Sulivan, 2012), as well as the establishment of more focused EAP in-service training, in which the methodological and pedagogical ifferences between ELT and EAP can be explicitly highlighted, are to be encouraged and applauded.

# 7. Conclusion

This opinion paper has suggested that classroom methodology and practical pedagogical matters in EAP deserve to be given more explicit ttention in the reearch articles which typicaly appear in JEAP than has hithertobeen the case. It has aoargued that some of the differences between mainstream ELT and EAP need to be considered alittle more critically when it comes to the practical applications of methodology and classroom pedagogy. I hope that the current generation of JEAP readers willrall to these call for action and that in the coming months and years, we will finlly start to witness the same levels f reearch article interest in the how of EAP, as we stil currently do in the what, as indeed Richard Watson Todd had so perspicaciously argued for almost two decades ago.

# Author statement

This research did not receive any specific grant from funding agencies in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors

# References

son  on      s., o   s . . Blackwell.   
Alexander, 0. (2012). Exploring teacher beliefs in teaching EAP at low proficiency lvels. Jonal of English for Academic Puposes, 11,9-111.   
Alexander, ., Argent, S., & Spencer, J.(2008). EAP Essentias. Ateacher's gude to principles and practice. Reading: Garnet Publishing Ltd.   
Anthny, L 017).in ora ad os t  thc wig co gh rie DL). J.r . ostley (Eds.), Discipline-specific writing: Theory into practice (pp163-181). Abingdon: Routledge.   
Anthony, L. (2018). Introducing English for specific purposes. Abingdon: Routledge.   
Argent,   dr,.011 P: w  i de r hr fo f iish o sndlie  lw Sd. s/ww. teachingenglish.org.uk/article/eap-how-it-different-other-forms-elt.   
BLEAP.08). k for rs f h o  . e r /./-/06/4/a competency-framework.pdf.   
BALEAP. (2012). The EAP practitioner: Competencies and controversies. Durham University (Professional Interest Meeting (PIM).   
BALEAP. (2016). Practitioner identity: Managing transitions to scholarship. BALEAP ResTES).   
BALEAP. (2017a). The EAP practitioner in the academy- A watershed moment? (EAP in the north symposium).   
BALEAP. (2017b). Knowledge and the EAP practitioner: A symposium. BALEAP ResTES).   
BALEAP. (2021). Exploring pedagogical approaches in EAP teaching. Scotland: Universty of Glasgow (Biennial Conference).   
Bell, D. E. (2005). Storming the Ivory Tower. EL Gazett, (June issue). In thisissue.   
Bell,  0r  t . c  .ng sh   n teaching EAP. Proceedings of IALS education symposia, 2004 and 2006. Edinburgh: IALS, University of Edinburgh. In this issue.   
Bell .  i  y Ankara, Turkey. In this issue.   
Bell  013).Tin       Pliv t tho ThAP Revisiting the Past and Building the Future. University of Nottingham. In this issue.   
Bell ,  s  , University of Nottingham. In this issue.   
Bell, .  (018. Th Prctice of AP in Astralia Rse y An ther Name  L T. ng, .   Wong d.) chig an ng ish or Aadc urpo Current Research and Practices. (1st, pp. 161-177). New York: Nova Science Publications. In this iss   
Bell, . 21.ig for th be s of ish an hr in iger io. ch in gher tio. h/iog/0.080/ 13562517.2021.1935848. In this issue.   
Brte,  er, . 200 rer d ati  n hr  hg  h  /.g/10.1080/ 13562517.2020.1839746   
Bren, . (84.   o t   . n  . 18,  47-6 Pergamon.   
Breen, M. P.(1985). Authenticity in the language classroom. Applied Linguistics, 6(1), 60-70.   
Breen, P. (2018). Developing educators for the digital ge framework for captring knowledge i actin. London: University of Westminster Pres.   
Brown, H. D. (2007). Principles of language learning and teaching $( 5 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ ed.). New York: Longman.   
Bruce, . (2005). Syllbus dein for general EAP writing courses: cognitive pproach. Jounl of English for Aademic Puposes, 4(3), 239-256.   
Bruce, I. (2011). Theory and concepts of English for academic purposes. Houndmills, Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
i.    u cn  i Nottingham.   
amin, . 016).Th nr  n r v nthi r is P.  of is f e, 23 59-70.   
Charles, M. (2014). Geting the corpus habit: EAP students long-term use of personal corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 35, 30-40.   
Charles, M. (2018). Corpus-assed eiting for doctoral students: More than just concordancing. Journal of Egish for Acdemic Puoses, 36, 15-25.   
Crotate , ,   br,21)   th b g nio nA st perceptions of online annotation of genres across disciplines. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 53, 1-16.   
Dalal, G., &Gulati, . (Eds. (2018). Invations in English Language ching in Indi: Trends in langage edgogy and techology. Lxington Books.   
Davis, M. (2019). Publishing research as an EAP practitioner: Opportunities and threats. Jounal of English for Academic Purposes, 39, 72-86.   
De Chazal, E. (2013). English for academic purposes. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ding, A., & Bruce, I. (2017). The English for academic purposes practitioner. Operating on the edge of academia. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Dng,  04)  c  i   smg teacher training in EAP. UK: University of Essex.   
sd i     i r . Unpublished MA diss. UK: University of Essex.   
Errey, L. (2001). EAP teacher training: How specialised is it? EL gazette (October edition).   
Fowrd00.   rica  t  t  of s  e, 4, 135-147.   
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (Eds.). (2001). Research perspecties on English for academic puposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Pres.   
Gilguin, G, Granger, ., & Pot, M (007). Lner orra: The mising link in EAP pedggy. Joal of nglish for deic Poses, , 319-335.   
Hall, G. (2011). Exploring English Language Teaching. Language in action. Abingdon: Routledge.   
Holmes, J. (2004). Intertextuality in EAP: An African context. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3, 73-88.   
Howatt, A. (1984). A history of English Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Hyland, K. (2002). Specificity revisited: How far should we go now? English for Specific Purposes, 21(4), 385-395.   
Hyland, K. (2006a). English for Academic Purposes an advanced resource book. Abingdon: Routledge.   
Hyland06). ish or     .   . .) o   ne Teaching (pp. 379-390). Springer International Handbooks.   
Hd academic purposes. University of Reading. . (Accessed 5 April 2009).   
Hyland, K. (2018). Sympathy for the devil? A defence of EAP. Language Teaching, 51(3), 383-399. ackson, D. O., & Burcl R. (2017). Complementary ask-based classroom realities. TEsOL Quarterly, 51(3), 493-506.   
anah    B  i,  01) t  c e   ,  AP practitioners. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 50. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.100971   
rishnamrthy, R, & em I (207). Ises i cring a orus for AP peggy and rarch. omal of Egish for Admc Pse, 6, 356-373.   
Krzanowski, . (201). /he hods the Trinty/L Dipoma: re thy rey  ch AP ied fro ht:/.a.o/balp/prt/2001/ bath/krzanowski.htm.   
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2006). TEs0L methods: Changing tracks, challenging trends. TEs0L Quarterly, 40(1), 59-81.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated learning: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge: Cambridge University Pres.   
Lin, A. (2013) ward padmatic chang i  metge: Bilding pilingl gie from the ground up. 0 Qurtely, 47(3) 521-545   
Lowtn, R. 020). h P f t  h of qulcion i hg ish orac ur  s. nirsty igham Ningbo China.   
Mazak, C. M. (2017). Translanguaging in higher education: Beyond monolingual ideologies. Bristol: Channel View Publications.   
Mishan, F. (2005). Designing authenticity into language learning materials. Bristol: Intellect Books.   
Mihan, . 017). it 2.i cit n the .  M, . o ., language learning (pp. 10-24). Newcastle Upon Tyne: Cambridge Scholars Publishing.   
Suliva. 2012). in he e rk nsoal cer iti ch its  s o  Pin dlv BALEAP professional interest meeting (PIM) the EAP practitioner: Competencies and controversies'. UK: Durham University.   
ang, M016     sth  f i  l d  tcr i OL Quarterly, 50(1), 246-263.   
Post D.  hiA diss. UK: University of Bath.   
Prabhu, N. S. (1990). There is no best method- why? TEsOL Quarterly, 24(2), 161-176.   
Prior, M. T. (2019) Elephants in the room: An "affective turn," or just feeing our way?The Modem Language Jounal, 103(2), 516-527.   
Rabbage, M. (2019). Translanguaging in EFL contexts: A call for change. London: Routledge.   
Richards, J C., & Rodgers, T. S. (2014). Aproaches and methods in Language Teaching (3rd ed.).Cambridge: Cambridge Universt Press   
Scott, M. (2001). Is an ELT training good enough for EAP?" EL Gazette (Sept edition).   
Sharpling, G. (2002). Learning to teach Englis for academic purposes: Some current trining and development isues. ETED, 6, 82-94.   
Sloan  & Por,  (209). Th mmet f gish lanag upor i te usisio: The  m conizatin, mbe, mapping). International Journal of Management in Education, 7(2), 51-58.   
Strevens, . (198. SP afr 20 : pral. InM Tick .) P: St f te t (p. 113). Spor E nal angg tre.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2019). The futures of EAP genre studies: A personal viewpoint. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 38, 75-82.   
Tomlinson, B. (2018). Text-driven approaches to task-based language teaching. Folio, 18(2), 4-7.   
Ve,, Pak J, e  d,  00      ir learning? Teaching in Higher Education. https:/doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2020.1863349   
Vira, 017) ti fr is w s  pic,  f g, d   e. TESOL Quarterly, 51(3), 693-715.   
Waters, A (209. gy in alid ingstcs for Lng ehing Aplied Lnuisics 301) 138-143. ps:/i.g/0.1093/applin/amp005   
Waters, A. (2012). Trends and Issues in ELT methods and methodology. ELT Journal, 6(4),440-449. htps://doi.org/10.1093/elt/ccs038   
Waters, A., & Waters, M. (1995). Study tasks in English. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Watson Todd, R. (2003). EAP or TEAP? Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 147-156.   
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice. Learning, meaning and identity. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Widdowson, H. G. (2003). Defining issues in English Language Teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Wilkins, D. A. (1976). Notional syllabuses. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Zulfikar, Z. (2018). Rethinking the use of L1 in L2 classroom. Englisia, 6(1), 43-51.