# Selected bibliography of recent scholarship in second language writing

Colleen Brice a , Carolina Pelaez-Morales b a Grand Valley State University, Allendale, MI, United States b Columbus State University, Columbus, GA, United States

This bibliography cites and summarizes essays and reports of research on second and foreign language writing that became available to its compilers during the period from July 1 to September 30, 2024.

Abdi Tabari, M. A., & Johnson, M. D. (2023). Exploring new insights into the role of cohesive devices in written academic genres. Assessing Writing, 57, 100749.

This study examined cohesive features in 270 narrative and argumentative essays written by 45 university ESL writers in the U.S. Multiple regression analyses were conducted to assess whether computational measures of cohesion could predict human ratings of essay quality and recognize differences in cohesion across genres. Results indicated clear differences in how cohesion was signaled in the two genres.

Agama, F. K., Hebbard, M., & Lopez-Fitzsimmons, ´ B. M. (2023). Negotiating the messiness of teaching linguistic justice online: Re flections of multilingual writing instructors during COVID. American Journal of Qualitative Research, 7(1), 128–148.

This phenomenological study explored how three multilingual writing instructors in U.S. higher education defined and incorporated linguistic justice in their online teaching during the pandemic. Analysis of surveys, interviews, pedagogical artifacts, and discussions indicated that the researcher-participants’ translinguistic histories impacted their pedagogies differently.

Alexander, K., Savvidou, C., & Alexander, C. (2023). Who wrote this essay? Detecting AI-generated writing in second language education in higher education. Teaching English with Technology, 23(2), 25–43.

In this study, six post-secondary ESL lecturers in Cyprus analyzed academic essays to detect those generated by AI, and these results were compared with the analysis of four AI-detection programs. Findings revealed that participants focused on error as an indicator of L2 writing output and viewed high levels of accuracy and sophisticated language as indicators of AI-generated texts.

Al Harrasi, K. T. S. (2023). Developing a needs‑based plagiarism management in second language writing in a higher education institute: Practice‑oriented research. Instructional Science, 51, 1079–1115.

This action research project examined citation practices among 16 undergraduates drawn from two classes in Oman. Analysis of interviews and reference-based essays written by participants before and after ten weeks of instruction showed a significant decrease in instances of plagiarism but only modest improvement in cases of misinterpreted citations among participants with low L2 English proficiency.

In this teaching tip, the author explains how writing tutors can use CLA-informed self-disclosures of their own language learning to welcome EAL students and present the Writing Center as a more plurilingual space.

Almusharraf, N., & Alotaibi, H. (2023). An error-analysis study from an EFL writing context: Human and automated essay scoring approaches. Technology, Knowledge, and Learning, 28, 1015–1031.

An automated essay scoring (AES) system (Grammarly) and university writing instructors applied Corder’s 1974 model to analyze errors in 197 essays written for a midterm by undergraduate EFL writers in Saudi Arabia. A moderate correlation was found between human raters and AES for total scores and number of errors detected.

Alnwairan, M. A., Al Harthy, S. R., Darwish, A. S., & Yacoub, M. A. (2023). To correct or not to correct: The impact of written corrective feedback on improving students’ writing about literature. World Journal of English Language, 13(7), 1–10.

This quasi-experiment compared the impact of direct and indirect written corrective feedback (WCF) on written accuracy among 45 undergraduate English literature majors in Oman. In essays written by treatment group participants, verb tense errors were corrected (direct) or highlighted (indirect); control group participants received no WCF. Pre-post-test data showed a decrease in verb tense errors for participants in both treatment groups.

Alrajhi, A. S. (2023). EFL learners’ perceptions and attitudinal fluctuations toward digital multimodal composition: A longitudinal approach. International Journal of Computer-Assisted Language Learning and Teaching, 13(1), 1–15.

This longitudinal study investigated the effects of digital multimodal composition (DMC) on EFL learners’ attitudes toward DMC. Participants were 41 L1-Arabic undergraduate English majors at a Saudi university, who completed five online tasks, five questionnaires, reflections, and focus group discussions. Findings indicate that participants maintained positive attitudes toward DMC.

Alrajhi, A. S. (2023). Genre effect on Google Translate–assisted L2 writing output quality. ReCALL, 35(3), 305–320.

This study compared Google-translated (GT) and student–generated texts across genres. Data included 328 written texts, reflections, attitude questionnaires, focus groups, and interviews with 41 undergraduate English majors at a Saudi university. GT texts were found to have higher literacy levels in all genres and better style and content in descriptive, expository, and persuasive genres.

Bai, B., & Wang, J. (2023). Conceptualizing self-regulated reading-to-write in ESL/EFL writing and investigating its relationships to motivation and writing competence. Language Teaching Research, 27(5), 1193–1216.

This study reports on the development of a self-regulated reading-to-write (SR-R2W) scale. The SR-R2W, a questionnaire, and a writing test were completed by 458 fifth-grade students in Hong Kong. SR-R2W strategy use was found to be positively correlated with writing competence, self-efficacy, and perceived task value, and to vary according to student achievement level.

Baring, J. A. M., & Chang, P. (2023). A cross-disciplinary study on the forms and functions of citations in the discussion sections of master’s theses in Taiwan. Taiwan Journal of TESOL, 20(2), 39–67.

The researchers compared the forms and functions of citations in discussion sections of 20 Applied Linguistics (AL) and 20 Biology (BIO) MA theses. They found that citation practices varied by discipline. AL writers used integral and non-integral citations equally, for the purposes of comparison and application, whereas BIO writers favored non-integral citations, which they used primarily for attribution.

Buendgens-Kosten, J., Cornillie, F., & Sauro, S. (2023). Teaching (multi)literacies, supporting multilingual identities: Plurilingual writing in an interactive fiction project. Fremdsprachen Lehren und Lernen (FLuL), 52(2), 72–89.

This follow-up study for the Erasmus $^ +$ FanTales project implemented a pedagogic intervention to promote plurilingualism with 78 multilingual high school students in Rhineland-Palatinate. Findings indicate that the interactive fiction writing task that participants completed was only partially successful in creating a space where all linguistic resources could be used.

Casal, J. E., & Yoon, J. (2023). Frame-based formulaic features in L2 writing pedagogy: Variants, functions, and student writer perceptions in academic writing. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 102–114.

The researchers analyzed phrase-frames (discontinuous formulaic sequences) in a corpus of 1600 conference abstracts in Applied Linguistics. The analysis informed a pedagogical intervention on formulaic language, which was implemented in a U.S. academic writing course for L2 English graduate students, whose uses and perceptions of the pedagogy were reported.

Chang, T-S. (2023). A move analysis of Chinese L2 student essays from the sociocognitive perspective: Genres, languages, and writing quality. Assessing Writing, 57, 100750.

The researcher conducted a move analysis on introductions in narrative $( n = 1 3 1 )$ ) and argumentative $( n = 1 3 3$ ) essays written by university ESL students in Taiwan. They found that most writers $( 8 0 \% )$ adopted characteristics of English writing (especially move 3, stating a thesis) but that only participants who received the highest scores $( 2 6 ~ \% )$ ) adopted all three moves.

Chang-Bacon, C. K., & Pedersen, J. M. (2023). From frustration to fascination: Discourse analysis as writing feedback for multilingual learners. Linguistics and Education, 77, 101229.

This study investigated how 42 secondary English teacher candidates from two U.S. universities engaged with a discourse-analysisbased approach to writing feedback. Participants’ feedback on multilingual adolescent writing was analyzed before and after they were introduced to the feedback approach. Participants’ feedback was found to change in terms of function (from corrective to observational) and focus (from grammar to content).

Chen, P. J. (2023). Looking for the right blend: A blended EFL university writing course. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 36(7), 1147–1176.

This article reports on the effectiveness of a blended EFL writing course that the author designed and implemented for 23 English majors in Taiwan. Data included pre-/post-writing tests, questionnaires, interviews, and observations. Students reported positive perceptions of the course and of the integration of blogging to support L2 writing.

Choi, J. (2023). From trilingualism to triliteracy: A trilingual child learning to write simultaneously in Korean, Farsi, and English. Applied Linguistics Review, 14(6), 1711–1731.

This case study examined how a trilingual child engaged with writing across English and two heritage languages (Korean and Farsi) over five years. Based on analysis of writing samples and audio-/video-recordings, the researcher-parent found that the child wrote at home to reconstruct his literate world, express interests and experiences, and express discontent in required tasks.

Cui, Y., Jin, H., & Gao, Y. (2023). Developing EFL teachers’ feedback literacy for research and publication purposes through intra- and inter-disciplinary collaborations: A multiple-case study. Assessing Writing, 57, 100751.

This five-year case study investigated teacher feedback literacy in English for research and publication purposes (ERPP) in China. Data included four participants’ comments on three manuscripts and their verbalizations while giving feedback, stimulated recalls, and interviews. Findings indicate that participants improved their ERPP literacy and became more aware of context-specific errors and disciplinary conventions.

Dinh, T. M. H. (2023). Synergic concepts and lexical idiosyncrasies as means of reconceptualization to develop bilingual pragmatic competence: A study of sequential bilingual students in different sociocultural contexts (Publication No. 30422546) [Doctoral dissertation, University at Albany, State University of New York].

This dissertation used Kecskes’ conceptual blending hypothesis to analyze variation in lexical choice among bilingual writers. A conceptual elicitation task that assessed ten socioculturally distinct concepts was administered to 36 L1-English students in the U.S. and to 108 L2 students, including 72 sequential Chinese-English bilingual students from the U.S. and China.

Di Zhang, E., & Yu, S. (2023). Investigating the relationship between linguistic changes in L2 writers’ paraphrasing, paraphrasing performance, and L2 proficiency. Applied Linguistics Review, 14(5), 1451–1473.

To investigate relationships between frequency of different linguistic transformations, paraphrasing performance, and L2 proficiency, the researchers analyzed the linguistic transformations in 202 Chinese university EFL writers’ responses to a paraphrasing test. They found that conceptual transformation was significantly correlated with paraphrasing score and that the use of different transformations varied according to student proficiency level.

Dolina, B. (2023). Multimodal composing and multiple identity mediations: Adult ESL writers’ experiences in New York. Palgrave MacMillan.

This case study explored relationships among L2 writers’ cultural and professional identifications, progress in writing, and multimodal texts written for an advanced ESL writing course taught by the researcher. Data was collected from three adults with college degrees and included multimodal texts and interviews.

Dontcheva-Navratilova, O. (2023). Self-mention in L2 (Czech) learner academic discourse: Realisations, functions, and distribution across master’s theses. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101272.

This study analyzed self-mention in a corpus of 78 L2 English-medium master’s theses written by Czech university students. Patterns of self-mention and preferences for authorial role were found to vary significantly in this corpus when compared to those in two L1-English reference corpora.

Du, J., Yuan, H., & Li, Q. (2023). Read between the lines: Evaluative patterns and paces in engineering research article introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 1–13.

This study examined engineering writers’ evaluative patterns in the introductions of the 100 most-cited research articles across ten sub-fields. Analysis of lexical frequencies, semantic prosodies, and rhetorical constructs showed that engineers tend to create and occupy the niche in a direct and factual manner.

Fukunaga, T. (2023). L2 writing development through two types of writing task repetition. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(3), 1109–1138.

This study investigated the effects of task type and repetition on complexity, fluency, and accuracy in essays written by 44 students of Japanese as a Foreign Language in a U.S. university. Analysis of pre-/post-test data showed that syntactic complexity and fluency improved significantly in treatment participants’ essays, for both descriptive and argumentative tasks.

G´anem-Guti´errez, G. A., & Gilmore, A. (2023) A mixed methods case study on the use and impact of web-based lexicographic tools on L2 writing. Computer Assisted Language Learning, 36(7), 1365–1391.

This study investigated the effects of web-based lexicographic tools on L2 writing quality. Digital screen capture and eye-tracking technologies were used to collect data from 22 university EFL learners in Japan as they wrote a timed essay. Results showed that participants spent $1 5 ~ \%$ of composing time consulting online tools, using bilingual resources most frequently.

Granena, G. (2023). Cognitive individual differences in the process and product of L2 writing. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 45 (7), 765–785.

The author reviews the cognitive abilities that have been studied in SLW to date and then synthesizes the findings of three new studies (published in this issue of SSLA) of working memory in SLW.

Hafner, C. A., Harrison, S., Ho, W. Y. J., & Kwan, B. S.-C. (2023). Digital mediation in ESP genres. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 115–122.

This editorial introduces the virtual special issue on digital mediation in ESP genres, which includes studies presented at the 6th International Conference of the Asia–Pacific LSP and Professional Communication Association.

Haiyudi, H., Pratama, Y. B., & Art-in, S. (2023). Post-editing machine translation (PEMT) as the preference method for university students in Indonesia. ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching, 12(2), 90–97.

The researchers surveyed 50 university English Education majors in Indonesia to identify their translation preferences. They found that a majority $( 7 7 \% )$ preferred Post-Editing Machine Translation (PEMT), though they did not always employ PEMT in practice.

Han, Y. J. (2023). Feedback and transfer in second language writing: A qualitative study of ESL students' experiences (Publication No. 648160) [The Ohio State University].

This study examined feedback transfer in the writing of four Chinese EFL graduate students in a graduate writing course in the U.S. Analysis of class observations, field notes, interviews, questionnaires, and drafts showed that students transferred grammar-oriented feedback, which was in line with the teachers’ feedback practices and their view of students as language learners.

Horowitz, R. (2023). The Routledge international handbook of research on writing, 2nd ed. Routledge.

This handbook compiles interdisciplinary research on writing in all levels of schooling and life situations. Comprising 14 chapters, the second edition includes surveys of scholarship on the histories of world writing and literacy, interconnections between writing, reading, and speech, and a new section on international measures for writing assessment.

Huhta, A., Harsch, C., Leontjev, D., & Nieminen, L. (2023). The diagnosis of writing in a second or foreign language. Routledge.

This 10-chapter book surveys diagnostic assessment of second and foreign language (SFL) writing. Using the diagnostic cycle as a framework, it covers the planning phase, cover design, development and delivery of diagnostic assessment, and ends with feedback and feed-forward approaches.

James, M. A. (2023). An exploratory investigation of instructors’ practices and challenges in promoting students’ learning transfer in EAP education. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101263.

This study investigated EAP instructors’ perspectives on promoting learning transfer. Interviews were conducted with 26 postsecondary EAP instructors in the U.S. Findings focus on the practices participants reported using to promote learning transfer and the challenges they faced in the process.

Jung, J., & Fu, X. (2023). The impact of pragmalinguistic support on video-conferenced collaborative suggestion-giving task. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(3), 1083–1107.

This quasi-experiment examined the impact of pragmalinguistic support on the peer feedback of university EFL students in an online TESOL course in Hong Kong. Twelve student pairs collaboratively wrote suggestions for improvement on peers’ lesson plans; six of the pairs received pragmalinguistic support. Treatment participants’ suggestions were found to contain more diverse lexical downgraders and conventional suggestion-giving expressions.

Kahveci, N., & S¸ entürk, B. (2023). A study on rubric development to evaluate writing skill in teaching Turkish as a foreign language. Bartın University Journal of Faculty of Education, 12(3), 545–569.

This study describes the development and validation of a rubric for evaluating writing in Turkish as a foreign language at a university language center in Turkey. Data were collected from 12 teachers who were experts in their fields. Interrater reliability was assessed via Kendall W.

Kang, S., & Kim, Y. (2023). EFL adolescent learners’ perceptions of digital multimodal composing tasks and task outcomes: A longitudinal study. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 33, 340–361.

This case study explored adolescent EFL learners’ perceptions of digital multimodal composing (DMC). Eight DMC tasks were implemented in a high school English composition class in South Korea. Data included questionnaires, interviews, surveys, and scores on DMC tasks, collected from three focal participants. Participants acknowledged a beneficial role of DMC tasks, but their perceptions varied over seven months.

Kim, H., & Ro, E. (2023). Additive extensive reading and syntactic development in second language writing: Analyses of syntactic complexity and sophistication in young EFL learners’ book reports. Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101040.

This quasi-experiment explored the impact of extensive reading (ER) on the writing of 26 young EFL students in South Korea. Analysis of book reports written by treatment participants before and after ER showed significant improvement in syntactic complexity (longer sentences and increased numbers of clauses and verb phrases). The control group showed improvement in sentence length only.

Kim, Y., Belcher, D., & Peyton, C. (2023). Comparing monomodal traditional writing and digital multimodal composing in EAP classrooms: Linguistic performance and writing development. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101247.

This study compared student writing performance under traditional and digital multimodal (DMC) instruction. Korean university EFL students (41), randomly assigned to monomodal or DMC groups, wrote two essays (causal analysis and argumentation). Both groups were found to make significant gains in writing over time, but the DMC group experienced greater gains and produced longer texts.

Kizil, A. S¸ . (2023). Data-driven learning: English as a foreign language writing and complexity, accuracy, and fluency measures. Journal of Computer Assisted Learning, 39, 1382–1395.

This quasi-experiment examined the effects of data-driven learning (DDL) on the writing of 31 university EFL students in Turkey. Treatment participants were taught to use corpus consultation to revise. The DDL group was found to produce more lexically diverse and fluent writing than the control, but no significant differences were found for accuracy and complexity.

Kobayashi, H., & Rinnert, C. (2023). Developing multilingual writing: Agency, audience, identity. Springer.

This book reports a series of studies exploring how writer agency, audience awareness, and writer identity progress as multilingual writers gain experience across languages. Part I presents four cross-sectional studies (103 writers, 185 essays, in English and Japanese); part II presents case studies of 11 multilingual writers; and part III synthesizes findings from parts I and II.

Kohls, R., & Casanave, C. P. (Eds.). (2023). Perspectives on good writing in applied linguistics and TESOL. University of Michigan Press.

This edited collection comprises 19 chapters on the nature of effective writing in first and additional languages at the post-secondary level, authored by seasoned scholars and pre-service teachers. It is organized in four parts: teaching, learning, and assessing; mentoring, supervising, and publishing; personal perspectives; and readers and reading.

Kormos, J. (2023). The role of cognitive factors in second language writing and writing to learn a second language. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 45, 622–646.

The author reviews the role of cognitive differences in creating synergies between SLW and SLA research. After reviewing advances in research on the roles of working memory and L2 learning in SLW, they review how cognitive factors can mediate learning gains during L2 writing and propose a model of writing.

Kristensen, L. B., & Sørensen, M.-L. L. (2023). På, i, for, or til: A comparative analysis of prepositions in the writing of L1 and L2 Danish users. Nordic Journal of Linguistics, 1–24.

This corpus study compared the use of Danish prepositions in essays written by 26 L1 and 28 L2 adult users of Danish in Denmark. Analysis focused on the distribution and characteristics of non-standard usage involving til ‘to’, i ‘in’, på ‘on’, and for ‘for’. Findings showed that nonstandard usage occurred in both groups, but they were much more frequent in L2 texts.

Kubokowa, J. M. (2023). The multilingual poetry task: Innovating L2 writing pedagogy in the secondary classroom. Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101039.

This article reports on the implementation of a multilingual poetry unit with two ELs in a U.S. high school. Data included participants’ poetry and reflections, interviews, and observations. Analysis focuses on how multilingual poetry represents innovation in SLW pedagogy and the benefits of collaboration between ESL and mainstream English teachers.

L´azaro-Ibarrola, A. (2023). Child L2 writers: A room of their own. John Benjamins.

This book presents an interdisciplinary analysis of the research on L2 writing by children. It comprises seven chapters divided into two parts. Part I surveys the research, addressing collaborative writing, WCF, task repetition, and task motivation. Part II presents guidelines for teaching writing to multilingual children.

Lecouvet, M. (2023). Non-canonical word order as a measure of syntactic complexity in advanced L2 German. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching, 61(3), 877–907.

The researchers investigated how syntactic diversity, as measured by use of noncanonical word order (passives and inversion), vary in relation to global proficiency and syntactic elaboration in the writing of 75 advanced (CEFR B2-C2 level) German FL university students in Berlin. Findings revealed a statistically significant increase in inversions between levels B2 and C1 but no corresponding difference for passives.

Lee, I. (2023). Problematising written corrective feedback: A global English perspective. Applied Linguistics, 44(4), 791–796.

In this forum article, the author argues that written corrective feedback (WCF) is problematic when viewed from a Global English perspective, proposing a focus on language use as an alternative to language correction and outlining the advantages of this broader perspective.

Lee, I., Karaca, M., & Inan, S. (2023). The development and validation of a scale on L2 writing teacher feedback literacy. Assessing Writing, 57, 100743.

This two-phase study developed and validated a scale to measure L2 writing teachers’ feedback literacy. In phase one, an exploratory analysis was conducted with 223 L2 writing teachers in diverse contexts, yielding a 34-item feedback scale. This scale was revised and administered to 208 SLW teachers. Confirmatory factor analysis showed the scale to be reliable and valid.

Lee, K. (2023). Diagnosing Chinese college-level English as a foreign language (EFL) learners’ integrated writing capability: A loglinear cognitive diagnostic modeling (LCDM) study. Assessing Writing, 57, 100730.

This study used integrated writing to assess the writing of 315 college EFL students in China. Timed essays written in response to a reading were analyzed for interactions among language use, source use, and content using Diagnostic Classification Models. Language use was found to be correlated with source use and to be the strongest predictor of writing ability.

Lestari, S. B., & Brunfaut, T. (2023). Operationalizing the reading-into-writing construct in analytic rating scales: Effects of different approaches on rating. Language Testing, 40(3), 684–722.

Using two analytic rating scales as proxies for two approaches to reading-into-writing construct operationalization, this study investigated the effects of the scales on rating reliability and consistency. Twenty raters with EFL teaching experience rated reading-into-writing tasks twice, once using each scale. Both scales resulted in reliable, consistent ratings, but Scale 1 produced more uniform difficulty-level interpretations.

Li, C., Wei, L., & Lu, X. (2023). Contributions of foreign language writing emotions to writing achievement. System, 116, 103074.

The researchers present two studies conducted with three groups of junior secondary EFL students in China $( \boldsymbol { \mathrm { n } } = 1 6 7 2 )$ . Study 1 developed and validated instruments to measure FL writing enjoyment and boredom. Study 2 analyzed one groups’ scores on two EFL writing tests and an exam. Regression analyses showed that boredom had the strongest negative effects on writing achievement.

Li, M., & Reynolds, B. L. (2023). Academic emotions in giving genre-based peer feedback: An emotional intelligence perspective. Applied Linguistics Review, 14(4), 933–1026.

This case study investigated how two Chinese EFL Ph.D. students in Macau used emotional intelligence (EI) when providing feedback on peers’ research proposals. Data included research proposal drafts and revisions, peer feedback, self-reports, interviews, and stimulated recalls. Findings indicate that participants experienced primarily negative emotions during peer review and adopted different EI patterns to regulate their feedback.

Li, S. (2023). Working memory and second language writing: A systematic review. Studies in Second Language Acquisition, 45, 647–679.

This researcher reviewed the scholarship on the role of working memory in SLW, synthesizing the methods and results of 16 studies. Working memory was found to be (1) largely unrelated to SLW proficiency, (2) predictive of specific aspects of SLW, and (3) influenced by genre, proficiency, target structure, and task demands.

Li, X., Jiang, F. K., & Ma, J. (2023). A cross-sectional analysis of negation used in thesis writing by L1 and L2 PhD students. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101264.

This study analyzed differences in the frequency, distribution, and function of negation used in 20 PhD theses in applied linguistics, half drawn from a Chinese database (L2 English) and half drawn from ProQuest (L1 English). Results showed that both groups employed various negative markers across sections, but that L2 English theses included fewer negative markers.

Li, Y., Deng, L., & Gao, X. (2023). From out-group to in-group: Exercising agency for gaining membership through statement of purposes writing. System, 116, 103081.

This study examined how three fourth-year university EFL students in China exercised agency in the process of writing statements of purpose (SOP) to gain membership into their target Master’s programs. Data included interviews and SOPs written for different programs. Findings focus on how participants negotiated their identities, expressed agency, and utilized external resources.

Liang, M., & Xie, Y. (2023). Exploring the effects of planning conditions and peer familiarity on Chinese EFL learners’ argumentative writing. System, 115, 103057.

This quasi-experiment investigated the effects of planning conditions and peer familiarity on argumentative essays written by 64 sophomore English majors in China. The $2 \times 2$ MANOVA analyses revealed that participants without time pressure achieved the best overall writing performance and that having unlimited composing time after collaborative planning benefitted syntactic complexity, lexical variation, and accuracy.

Liao, J., & Lu, C. (2023). Interpersonal resources in letter writing of young L2 Chinese learners. System, 115, 103038.

This study investigated how Chinese EFL students in grades 4–10 deployed interpersonal resources in letters. Analysis of discourse features in 80 personal letters showed that participants were aware of the general structure of letters and that higher writing proficiency correlated with a greater number and/or more diversified modals, hedges, directives, and reader markers.

Luzόn, M.-J. (2023). Forms and functions of intertextuality in academic tweets composed by research groups. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101254.

This study explored the forms and functions of intertextuality in 300 tweets drawn from the Twitter accounts of four research groups in two disciplines (Chemistry, Medicine). Analysis showed that the affordances of Twitter (hyperlinking, modularity, multimodality) and the purpose of academic tweets shaped the forms and functions of intertextuality in the sample.

Mafulah, S., & Cahyono, B. Y. (2023). Indonesian students’ engagement in online EFL writing class and their perceptions on teacher feedback. Indonesian Journal of Applied Linguistics, 13(1), 152–164.

This study investigated the engagement with teacher feedback among 24 university students in an online EFL paragraph writing course in Indonesia. Data included observations, interviews, and a survey. Findings indicate that participants held positive perceptions of teacher feedback, which they actively used to revise and edit.

Maimone, L., & Jolley, J. (2023). Looks like Google to me: Instructor ability to detect machine translation in L2 Spanish writing. Foreign Language Annals, 56(3), 627–644.

This study examined teachers’ abilities to distinguish machine translation (MT) and typical writing. Post-secondary students $( n =$ 26) in an L2 Spanish composition course in the U.S. wrote narrative and argumentative essays, half using Google translate. Essays were analyzed by 31 Spanish instructors, who were able to accurately distinguish MT- from non-MT-texts.

Martinez-Buffa, I., & Safont, P. (2023) Multilingual pragmatic awareness in collaborative writing. Language Awareness, 32(3), 421–442.

This study investigated pragmatic awareness among 30 university students in Spain as they collaborated in pairs to write email requests in three languages (Catalan, Spanish, English). Pairs’ recorded interactions were analyzed for pragmatic-related episodes using Brown & Levinson (1987) and Leech (1983). Findings indicate that participants focused on language form, disregarding sociopragmatic issues concerning familiarity, status, and imposition.

Mavrou, I., & Chao, J. (2023). What does linguistic distance predict when it comes to L2 writing of adult immigrant learners of Spanish? Written Communication, 40(3), 943–975.

This study examined the influence of L1-L2 linguistic distance on the writing of 292 adult immigrants from 39 countries who were beginning L2 Spanish learners in Spain. Findings showed that linguistic distance, length of residence, education, and overall L2 Spanish proficiency predicted participants’ overall L2 writing scores.

Moody, S. M., Holtz, E., Saenz, J., & Schichl, K. (2023). Preservice teacher preparation for second language writing instruction: A content analysis. The Teacher Educator, 58(3), 307–323.

This study examined the positioning of writing in U.S. teacher education programs for prospective elementary ESL teachers. Of the 398 ESL courses identified, only three included the word writing in their title, and 47 included writing in their descriptions. When included, writing was typically referenced alongside speaking, reading, and listening.

Moradkhani, S., & Mansouri, B. (2023). Impact of a research-informed intervention on L2 teachers’ WCF cognitions and practices: A sociocultural perspective. System, 115, 103052.

This case study explored the influence of exposure to selected written corrective feedback (WCF) research on the perceptions and WCF practices of four MA-TEFL students in Iran. Analysis of participants’ reactions to articles, WCF on sample essays, and responses to interviews revealed that their WCF cognitions and practices transformed in multifaceted, individualistic, and situated ways.

Mozzafari, S. H. (2023). The effects of EFL learners’ attitudes on participation and learning during collaborative writing. TESL-EJ, 27 (2), 1–24.

This study investigated whether EFL learners’ attitudes toward collaborative writing influenced their interactions during collaborative writing. Recordings of twenty pairs of adult EFL students in Iran as they wrote a text in English were analyzed for languagerelated episodes (LREs). Pairs with positive attitudes exhibited more collaborative patterns, generated more LREs, and noticeably outperformed negative attitude pairs on all measures.

Mujitaba, S. M., Barrot, J. S., Parkash, R., & Nawaz, M. W. (2023). Combining sociocognitive-transformative approach and formfocused instruction: Effects on L2 learners’ complexity, accuracy, and fluency in writing. 3 L—Language, Linguistics, Literature: The Southeast Asian Journal of English Language Studies, 29(3), 180–194.

This quasi-experiment examined the effects on L2 writing of a teaching intervention that combined form-focused instruction (FFI) with sociocognitive-transformative pedagogy. University EFL writing students in Pakistan were divided into treatment $\left( n = 3 6 \right)$ ) and control $( n = 3 6 )$ ) groups. Analysis of pre-/post-test data showed that treatment participants’ writing improved in all fluency measures and several accuracy and complexity measures.

Navarro, M. F., Alvarez, S. P., & Lee, E. (2023). Multilingual epicenters: First-year writing and the writing center as critical sites of multilingual sustainability for language-minoritized students in higher education. Open Words: Access and English Studies, 15(1), 143–162.

In an effort to redress the harm caused to language-minoritized students by higher education, the authors examine the practices in first-year writing and Writing Centers of three metropolitan U.S. universities. As they reflect on their pedagogy, they contend with questions of how to empower multilingual students in ways that centralize their ways of knowing and languaging.

Nejadghanbar, H., Hu, G., & Babadi, M. J. (2023). Publishing in predatory language and linguistics journals: Authors’ experiences and motivations. Language Teaching, 56(3), 297–312.

A questionnaire administered to 2793 academics with publications in 63 potentially predatory language/linguistics journals (PPJs) was completed by 213 participants, 21 of whom provided additional detail via interview or email. Findings indicate that most authors were from Asia, had doctorates, chose PPJs for publication speed and/or to meet professional requirements, and viewed PPJs as reputable.

Neupane Bastola, M., & Ho, V. (2023). Rhetorical structure of literature review chapters in Nepalese PhD dissertations: Students’ engagement with previous scholarship. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, 101271.

The researchers employed a modified CARS model to analyze L2 writers’ engagement with previous scholarship in the literature reviews (LR) of 60 PhD dissertations across disciplines at a university in Nepal. They found that a majority of LRs comprised a single move (establishing a territory) and that many presented prior scholarship as received knowledge.

Nikbakht, E., & Miller, R. T. (2023). The development of ESL students’ synthesis writing through reading instruction. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, 101274.

This quasi-experiment investigated the effects of reading instruction on synthesis writing among 28 L2 writers in a U.S. intensive English program. Participants received the same instruction on synthesis writing, but treatment participants received reading instruction focused on connecting texts. Qualitative results showed that treatment participants acknowledged source information more explicitly and drew connections between sources.

Overstreet, M., Akhmedjanova, D., & Vaccino-Salvadore, S. (2023). Brain-bound vs. extended: Contrasting approaches to secondlanguage research writing in digital environments. Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101019.

The researchers studied how two L2 English Arab undergraduates used digital resources as they completed a research writing task in a first-year university writing course in the U.S. Data included interviews and screen-captures of writing activity, collected over a five-week period. Participants were found to deploy a wide range of digital resources in creative ways.

Ozgür ¨ Küfi, E. (2023). Activation of content‑schemata for scaffolding L2 writing: Voices from a Turkish context. Journal of Psycholinguistic Research, 52, 2405–2427.

This study explored the effects of instruction designed to activate learners’ content-schema on essays written by 14 EFL students at an English-medium university in Turkey. Analysis of essays and questionnaires indicated that content-schemata activation led to better essay content. Participants had positive perceptions of the intervention.

Ӧzyes¸ilpinar, E., & lddrisu, M. S. (2023). A rhetoric of accent fear and the experiences of multilingual teachers of writing. Reflections, 23(1), 1–35.

The authors introduce a framework for viewing accent fear as a form of linguistic racism, which they call “a rhetoric of accent fear.” Through this framework, they reflect on their stories of accent fear as multilingual writing teachers and offer strategies with which other multilingual writing professionals may navigate their own experiences and challenge students’ accent fears.

Park, G., Bogdan, S., Rosa, M., & Navarro, J. (Eds.). (2023). Critical pedagogy in the language and writing classroom: Strategies, examples, activities from teacher scholars. Routledge.

This edited collection introduces Freirian-based critical pedagogy to language and literacy learning settings. The 23 chapters cover key topics (place-based pedagogy, translingual and multimodal paradigms), present authentic experiences of teacher-scholars in diverse contexts, and offer examples of critical pedagogy for implementation.

Phan, H. L. T., & Dao, P. (2023). Engagement in collaborative writing: Exploring learners’ control of task content and text quality. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 33, 242–259.

This study investigated the relationship between learner engagement in collaborative writing (CW), control of task content, and writing quality. Undergraduate EFL students in Vietnam performed two CW tasks requiring story-writing based on pictures. Results showed that participants exhibited higher engagement in CW when they had greater control over task content and language-related episodes predicted text accuracy.

Qin, J., & Stapleton, P. (Eds.). (2023). Technology in second language writing: Advances in composing, translation, writing pedagogy, and data-driven learning. Routledge.

This edited collection presents state-of-the-art research in technological applications in second language writing. Its 11 chapters include empirical studies, research reviews, and descriptive essays addressing issues including multimodal composing, digital feedback, data-driven learning, machine translation, use of social media, corpus learning, and translation software.

Qin, W., & Zhang, X. (2023). Do EFL learners use different grammatical complexity features in writing across registers? Reading and Writing, 36, 1939–1967.

This study examined register flexibility in writing by 205 adolescent and adult EFL students in the U.S. and U.K. Participants completed two writing tasks (academic and colloquial), which were analyzed for register variation. Academic texts were found to exhibit clear cross-register variations in grammatical complexity. English proficiency was associated with register flexibility for phrasal noun modifiers only.

Quist, J. (2023). Translingual creative writing: A non-Anglophone way for creative writing education. [Doctoral dissertation, University of Alberta]. Education and Research Archives.

This dissertation theorized translingual creative writing (CW), identified translingual CW strategies in scholarship and fiction published by multilingual writers, and adapted these strategies for use in multilingual postsecondary CW workshops in China.

Rabbi, S. (2023). Towards decolonizing L2 writing pedagogy: Translingual and transmodal resources, ELT Journal, 77(3), 338–347.

The author argues for translingual and transmodal resources as a way toward decolonizing L2 writing pedagogy and provides examples of how to enact this in the classroom based on their own praxis.

Rad, H. S., & Alipour, J. (2023). Writing skills in CALL: Effects of L2MSS vision-inspired instruction on L2 students’ motivation and achievement. System, 115, 103063.

This quasi-experiment investigated the effects of vision-inspired instruction on the L2 Motivational Self System (L2MSS) and writing development of L2 learners in a CALL context. Pre-/post-test writing tasks and questionnaires were collected from 51 adult EFL students in a language institute in Iran. ANCOVA analysis showed that the intervention affected participants’ ideal L2 selves.

Saeli, H., Rahmati, P., & Koltovskaia, S. (2023). Learner engagement with written corrective feedback: The case of automated writing evaluation. Journal of Response to Writing, 9(2), 1–39.

This study examined engagement with automated writing evaluation (AWE) feedback among six university ESL writers in the U.S. Participants edited two summaries after receiving e-feedback on error. Edits were analyzed for accuracy and completion. Findings indicate that participants engaged actively with AWE (e.g., not changing structures inaccurately marked as errors), and that their engagement varied based on their perceptions of AWE.

Sala-Bubar´e , A., & Castello, ´ M. (2023). Exploring writing processes in authentic writing tasks: A multimodal mixed-method approach. Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101038.

The researchers describe a task they designed and implemented with doctoral students in Spain to collect detailed information about individual writing processes and products without intruding on them. The three-part task, which is detailed, engaged technologies to track participants’ keystrokes and screen activity as they wrote and revised an abstract for a research article they planned to write.

Sammour‑Shehadeh, R., Kahn-Horwitz, J., & Prior, A. (2023). Spelling English as a foreign language: A narrative review of cross‑language influences due to distance in writing system, orthography, and phonology. Reading and Writing, 36, 2147–2173.

This article reviews the research on cross-language influences in EFL spelling. The authors identified 28 empirical studies published between 2005–2021 that met their inclusion criteria. Analysis of these studies showed that distance from L1 affects EFL spelling, and that this effect varies based on the type of distance involved (writing system, orthographic, or phonological).

Schleppegrell, M. J., Sun, S., & Monte-Sano, C. (2023). The value of models to support students’ voice in middle school social studies argument writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101043.

The researchers used systemic functional linguistics to analyze writing by 19 multilingual U.S. middle school students in inquirybased social studies classes over two years. Analysis of how participants drew on mentor texts (MTs) to write arguments with evidence from sources revealed that they rarely drew on MTs without adding their own meanings, and that MTs enabled students to engage in disciplinary thinking while writing.

Schmidt, N. (2023). Unpacking second language writing teacher knowledge through corpus-based pedagogy training. ReCALL, 35(1), 40–57.

This case study investigated six in-service SLW teachers’ integration of data-driven learning (DDL) as they participated in an online corpus-based pedagogy workshop. Data included instructional materials, reflections, and DDL activity plans. Participants reported increased confidence in the use of corpora and different approaches toward implementation.

Shen, Y. (2023). Bilingual but not biliterate: The literacy of heritage language learners (Publication No. 29994695) [Doctoral dissertation, University of Delaware].

This dissertation presents three studies exploring the literacy development of heritage language learners (HLLs) and its impact on language acquisition in the U.S. With different foci (adulthood, childhood, and neurobiology, respectively), each study explores the behavioral and neurobiological impact of HLL status on reading, writing, and reading-writing relations.

Shinta, L. G. B., Astuti, U. P., & Ariani, N. (2023). College students’ preferences for written corrective feedback. ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching, 12(2), 74–89.

The researchers surveyed 188 university English Language Education students in Indonesia to identify their written corrective feedback (WCF) preferences. Analysis of questionnaires and follow-up interviews showed that participants expected WCF on all writing and preferred WCF that marked both error location and type.

Silva, B. B. (2023). Writing to learn academic words: Assessment, cognition, and learning. Springer.

This nine-chapter book explores the role of writing for the development of academic vocabulary, reporting three studies on the subject conducted in Poland, and drawing on scholarship in SLA, psycholinguistics, corpus linguistics, and L2 writing.

Sims, M. L. (2023). Shifting perceptions of socially just writing assessment: Labor-based contract grading and multilingual writing instruction. Assessing Writing, 57, 100731.

This phenomenological case study investigated the use and perceptions of contract grading by two instructors of sheltered, multilingual first-year writing courses in the U.S. Analysis of interviews, observations, and artifacts indicate that participants used contract grading to create opportunities for multilingual writers, but that their goals varied based on their definitions of social justice.

Sletova, N. (2023). L2 writing as a scaffold for L2 speaking accuracy. International Journal Applied Linguistics, 33, 207–223.

This quasi-experiment investigated the potential of SLW to scaffold L2 speaking accuracy among 44 novice and intermediate Russian as a foreign language university students in the U.S. Participants completed a text reconstruction task using written and spoken recall. Findings showed that grammatical accuracy significantly improved in oral text reconstruction tasks only when preceded by written recall.

turk, E. (2023). The teaching of writing across the curriculum in school years 4–6 in Sweden. Written Communication, 40(3), 892–942.

This study investigated disciplinary writing in grades 4–6 in Sweden. Observations from 104 student teachers in 374 lessons in 76 Swedish schools were analyzed using Ivaniˇc’s (2004) discourses of writing. Findings indicate that writing was used for content learning across the curriculum, commonly with a single focus on reinforcing learning, and that writing to develop writing proficiency was infrequent, being required mainly by language teachers.

Suh, B.-R. (2023). Are think-alouds reactive? Evidence from an L2 written corrective feedback study. Language Teaching Research, 27 (5), 1099–1199.

Part of a larger project, this quasi-experiment explored the effects of thinking aloud while processing written corrective feedback (WCF). WCF was provided on written story-retelling tasks completed by 59 university EFL learners in South Korea. Treatment participants thought aloud when reviewing WCF. No effects were found on participants’ development of receptive knowledge or ability to produce target structures.

Sun, Q., & Zhang, L. J. (2023). Examining the effects of English as a foreign language student-writers’ metacognitive experiences on their writing performance. Current Psychology, 42, 23743–23758.

This study investigated the effects of EFL writers’ metacognitive experiences on writing performance. Two writing tasks and the EFL Learners’ Writing Metacognitive Experiences Questionnaire were completed by 435 university EFL writers in China. Structural equation modeling showed that metacognitive estimates of EFL writing had a significant positive effect on lexical complexity and fluency but a negative effect on accuracy.

Supiani, Yansyah, & Basthomi, Y. (2023). Indonesian university students' engagement with teacher's written corrective feedback in English as an additional language writing classroom. Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 11(2), 147–166.

This case study investigated student engagement with teacher-provided written corrective feedback (WCF) among 25 university students in Indonesia. Analysis of interviews and teacher-student conferences showed that participants felt more engaged with direct WCF compared to indirect WCF, which they found to be more challenging and demanding.

Susilawati, Fajriah, Y. N., & Yunita, S. (2023). Google docs in English for business purposes courses: The exploration of students’ acceptance. ELT Forum: Journal of English Language Teaching, 12(2), 98–109.

The researchers surveyed and interviewed 18 university EFL students in Indonesia concerning their perceptions of using Google Docs in their English for Business Purposes writing course. They found that most participants had positive views of Google Docs, which they viewed as helpful and easy to use.

Swales, J., & Feak, C. (2023). Task evolution in English for Academic Purposes writing materials: The case of “information transfer” to “critical commentary.” Journal of Second Language Writing, 61, 101017.

The researchers analyzed task in EAP writing materials, focusing on written commentaries on non-verbal materials (e.g. tables, graphs). Using illustrative samples from their analysis, they trace the evolution from information transfer activities to data commentary and critical data commentary. They conclude by proposing a definition of EAP task that distinguishes it from more limited activities and exercises.

Tan, X. (2023). “How can I sound politician?”: A case study of multilingual writer transferring prior knowledge in multimodal composing. Open Words: Access and English Studies, 15(1), 44–63.

This case study investigated the multimodal writing processes of an L1-Arabic EFL student in a first-year university composition course in the U.S. Data included screen-recordings with think-aloud protocols, writing assignments, class observations, and interviews. Findings focus on how the participant transferred prior knowledge and mobilized procedural, genre, and rhetorical knowledge at different stages.

Teng, M. F., & Zhan, Y. (2023). Assessing self-regulated writing strategies, self-efficacy, task complexity, and performance in English academic writing. Assessing Writing, 57, 100728.

This study examined the effects of task complexity on the academic writing of 270 university EFL learners in China. Participants completed writing tasks of varied complexities (3 levels). Findings indicate that task complexity significantly impacted writing performance and predicted self-efficacy beliefs, which in turn influenced self-regulating strategies.

Thuy, D. T. B. (2024). Effects of scaffolded peer review training on revision quantity and quality in foreign language writing. Iranian Journal of Language Teaching Research, 11(2), 55–73.

This study examined the effects of peer review training (PRT) on revision among 20 university French majors in Taiwan. Participants received PRT for two months, completed writing tasks, received instructor feedback, and gave/received peer feedback in pairs. Analysis of participants’ use of peer feedback showed that PRT had a positive impact on revision.

Tong, C. K.-Y., Ho, J. C. S., Yang, X., McBride, C., Ng, M. C. Y., & Pan, D. J. (2023). Transfer? Reading, writing, and parental factors in Hong Kong Chinese families across Chinese and English. Reading and Writing 36, 1997–2023.

This study examined the effects of parental literacy on 147 Chinese children (L1 Cantonese, L2 English) in Hong Kong. Parental literacy was found to significantly explain children’s English reading and spelling (after controlling for socio-economic status (SES)), and cross-linguistic transfer was found for reading and writing after controlling for age, grade, non-verbal intelligence, and SES. These findings were replicated with a twin sample.

Wang, A., Yu, S., Wang, M., Wu, L., Wang, D., & Huang, L. (2023). Promoting meaningful peer feedback among in-service Chinese language teachers in an online lesson study. System, 115, 103055.

This quasi-experiment studied the influence of an instructional intervention (professional development (PD) in effective feedback) on the peer feedback offered on lesson plans by 60 primary school teachers of Chinese as a local language in China. Peer feedback provided by participants who received PD was found to be more meaningful and constructive.

Wang, W., & Jiang, L. (2023). Writing on WeChat moments: Impact on writing performance and learner autonomy. Computer Assisted Language Learning 36(7), 1236–1264.

This quasi-experiment studied the effects of computer-mediated writing on L2 writing. Participants were 50 first-year university English majors in China, half of whom took writing on WeChat Moments instead of the traditional course. The WeChat group was found to achieve better writing performance and higher levels of learner autonomy than the traditional group.

Wang, X., Zuo, J., & Wang, X. (2023). Written corrective feedback scientometric review (1987–2022). Arab World English Journal, 14 (3), 87–109.

This article reviewed the research on written corrective feedback (WCF) published over 35-years, including 497 articles indexed in the Web of Science. CiteSpace 6.1 was used to analyze the developmental history of the field. Foci include quantity of studies, disciplines involved, geographical sites of scholarship, major research themes, and emerging trends.

Wette, R. (Ed.). (2023). Teaching and learning source-based writing: Current perspectives and future directions. Routledge.

This edited collection represents a comprehensive update to the scholarship on the learning and teaching of source-based writing. Comprising 16 chapters authored by leading scholars around the world, it shares significant findings and research-based pedagogies from diverse contexts. Topics include metacognitive skills, flipped classrooms, scaffolding, assessment, plurilingual writing, and ethical considerations.

Wu, P., & Lei, C. (2023). Developing feedback literacy through dialogue-supported performances of multi-draft writing in a postgraduate class. Assessing Writing, 57,100759.

This study examined feedback literacy among 25 post-graduate applied linguistics majors in EAP writing in China. Participants engaged in two iterations of multi-draft essay writing and feedback activities, the second of which included dialogue. Findings indicate that participants developed dynamic views of feedback and strategies to solve conflicts when supported by dialogue.

Wu, P., Yu, S., & Luo, Y. (2023). The development of teacher feedback literacy in situ: EFL writing teachers’ endeavor to humancomputer-AWE integral feedback innovation. Assessing Writing, 57, 100739.

This study examined the efforts of two college EFL writing teachers to design a human-computer-automated writing evaluation (AWE) feedback instrument in China, and the effects of this process on their feedback literacy and practices. Findings focus on how participants negotiated the process and the activities that mediated their conceptions and provision of feedback.

Xie, Q. (2023). Assessing source use: Summary vs. reading-to-write argumentative essay. Assessing Writing, 57, 100755.

This study investigated how three raters assessed the source-based writing of 204 university ESL undergraduates in Hong Kong. Participants completed two integrated writing tasks requiring source use (summary and argumentative essay) after a tutorial familiarizing them with the tasks. Findings showed rating consistency for the summary task but not the argumentative task.

Xu, W., Zhao, P., Yuan, Y., Pang, W., & Zhu, X. (2023). Effects of self-efficacy on integrated writing performance: A cross-linguistic perspective. System, 115, 103065.

This study investigated the effects of writing self-efficacy on the writing of 239 university English majors in China. Participants completed two integrated (IW) writing tasks (in L1 and L2) and writing self-efficacy questionnaires (in L1 and L2). Structural equation modeling showed that writing self-efficacy was a positive, significant predictor of participants’ IW performance in the L2 but not the L1.

Yacoub, O. (2023). Multilingual academic writing: Transfer from a bridge course. Composition studies, 51(1), 124–134.

The author describes his experiences designing and teaching an academic writing course for multilingual high school students in a U.S. boarding school. The goal of the course was to help students transfer knowledge from high school to college. Theoretical underpinnings, strategies, and assignments are detailed.

Yang,C., & Zhang, L. J. (2023). Think-aloud protocols in second language writing: A mixed-methods study of their reactivity and veridicality. Springer.

This book reports a comprehensive study of the effects of think-aloud protocols (TAPs) on the L2 writing of 85 Chinese sophomores. Data included writing tasks (with and without TAPs), tests of working memory, and retrospective interviews. The eight chapters review the previous scholarship, detail the methodology, present findings of the analysis of quantitative and qualitative data, and offer implications for future SLW research and pedagogy.

Yang, L., & Valentín-Rivera, L. (2023). Developing writing competence in L2 Chinese: Classroom research and application. Bristol: Multilingual Matters.

This edited collection presents new empirical research and teaching strategies for developing writing competence in L2 Chinese classrooms. The eight chapters cover key themes, including heritage versus foreign language writers, individual versus collaborative writing, writing as process versus product, and written corrective feedback (WCF) in the L2 Chinese context. Each chapter includes pedagogical recommendations.

Yang, S. (2023). Literacy autobiographies from the global south: An autoethnographic study of English literacy in China. Routledge.

Using an autoethnographic approach, this book focuses on literacy ethnography as a tool for developing critical pedagogy in EFL writing instruction and teacher education in China. It comprises three sections, the first and last of which present the literacy journeys of the author and of ten of his students, and the second of which reviews the literature.

Yang, Y., Yap, N. T., & Mohamad Ali, A. (2023). Predicting EFL expository writing quality with measures of lexical richness. Assessing Writing, 57, 100762.

This study explored the relationship between lexical richness and FL writing quality in 270 essays drawn from a Chinese EFL learner corpus. Essays were analyzed for 26 measures of lexical richness and rated by three humans. Regression analyses showed that word count and lexical variation accounted for most of the score variation.

Yu, S., Jiang, L., & Zhou, N. (2023). The impact of L2 writing instructional approaches on student writing motivation and engagement. Language Teaching Research, 27(4), 958–973.

This study investigated the impact of three instructional approaches on the L2 writing motivation and engagement of 1190 university EFL students in China. Analysis of surveys indicated that product pedagogy had positive and negative effects; process pedagogy promoted L2 writing engagement; and genre pedagogy promoted both L2 writing engagement and motivation.

Zhang, F., Schunn, C., Chen, S., Li, W., & Li, R. (2023). EFL student engagement with giving peer feedback in academic writing: A longitudinal study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 64, 101255.

This study examined how three EFL undergraduates of different proficiency levels engaged in peer feedback over ten feedback sessions in a university EAP writing course in China. Data included peer feedback, reflective journals, interviews, stimulated recalls, and self-efficacy surveys. Findings showed initial engagement differences and extensive gains in engagement across all three learners.

Zhang, J., & Liu, C. (2023). An investigation into the missions and practices of glocal writing centers in the Chinese context: ERPP and EAP-EGP hybrid approaches. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, 101290.

This study examined the missions and practices at 11 glocal writing centers (WCs) in China. Stakeholders were interviewed based on images they had selected to represent their WCs. The WCs were found to be distinguished by several practices (e.g. strong preference for faculty tutors) and to represent two types: English for research publication purposes or hybrid EAP.

Zhang, L., & Zhang, L. J. (2023). Development and validation of the questionnaire on EFL students’ perceptions of authorial stance in academic writing. Applied Linguistics Review, 14(5), 1219–1251.

This article presents two studies. The first describes the development and validation of a questionnaire to assess EFL students’ perceptions of authorial stance. The second explored the relationship between stance perceptions (as measured by Study 1′s questionnaire) and stance deployment (as reflected in students’ thesis introductions) among 84 undergraduate English majors in China. No correlations were found.

Zhang, X. (2023). Exploring L2 students’ experiences with an integrated teacher written and spoken feedback strategy. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 33, 362–381.

This case study investigated students’ responses to multi-modal teacher feedback in a university EFL writing course in China. Students $( n = 1 8 )$ ) received meaning-focused written and oral feedback from their teacher on four essays. Analysis of feedback, students’ drafts and reflections, and interviews showed a positive relationship between sequential feedback and the quality of students’ revisions.

Zhang, Y., & Su, H. (2023). (Mis)use of definition in Chinese EFL postgraduate students’ academic writing: A local grammar based investigation. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, 101283.

This study examined the use of definitions in academic writing by student and expert writers in applied linguistics. Data included 60 MA theses drawn from a Chinese database and 100 articles published in Applied Linguistics, which were analyzed for local grammar patterns. Findings showed that EFL students used definition four times more often than experts.

Zhang, Z. (2023). Becoming a member of the business community. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 48–50.

The author comments on his 2018 study of Chinese university Business English majors’ knowledge of business genre expectations and suggests directions for future research.

Zhang-Wu, Q., Stephens, A., & Lerner, N. (2023). Meaningful writing projects among multilingual undergraduate writers: Personal, practical and developmental. Composition Studies, 51(2), 20–41.

This study investigated multilingual students’ perceptions of meaningful writing, building on Eodice et al. (2016). Self-identified multilingual students in a U.S. university $( n = 1 1 5 3 )$ completed a questionnaire asking them to describe a meaningful writing project. Findings indicate that participants found writing meaningful when it allowed them to make personal connections, was applicable elsewhere, or represented a means of improvement.

Zhao, P., Zhu, X., Yao, Y., & Liao, X. (2023). Ideal L2 self, enjoyment, and strategy use in L2 integrated writing: A self-regulatory learning perspective. System, 115, 103033.

This study explored the relationships among ideal L2 writing self, enjoyment, strategy use, and writing performance in integrated writing (IW). Two argumentative IW tasks and questionnaires were completed by 239 university English majors in China. Findings indicate that strategy use was connected to higher IW scores, and that ideal self predicted L2 writing achievement.

Zheng, Y., & Xu, J. (2023). Unpacking the impact of teacher assessment approaches on student writing engagement: A survey of university learners across different languages. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 48(8), 1240–1253.

This study examined the impact of formative, summative, and portfolio assessment on the L2 writing engagement of 587 undergraduate students majoring in English, French, and Japanese in China. Analysis of survey and interview data showed that formative and portfolio assessment positively predicted planning, task management, and persistence in L2 writing, whereas summative assessment negatively predicted persistence.

Zheng, Z. Z., & Drybrough, A. G. (2023). Translanguaging in the academic writing process: Exploring Chinese bilingual postgraduate students’ practices at a British university. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 65, 101269.

This study examined the translanguaging practices of five postgraduate Chinese students as they wrote doctoral dissertations at a British university. Data included all participant writing and interviews. Findings identified six translanguaging practices that served different purposes, including more expressing ideas more accurately and efficiently, retrieving information, and drawing relationships between ideas.

Zhou, H., & Jiang, F. K. (2023). ‘The study has clear limitations’: Presentation of limitations in conclusion sections of PhD dissertations and research articles in applied linguistics. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 34–47.

This study examined metadiscourse in limitations sections of research articles in applied linguistics. Concordance software was used to identify common metadiscourse terms in $1 0 0 \mathrm { P h D }$ dissertations from China’s official database and 200 published articles in AL. Findings indicate that evidentials, hedges, and self-mentions were used more frequently by experts and that research limitations were more often reported in dissertations.

Colleen Brice is associate professor of English at Grand Valley State University (Michigan, USA), where she is section chair of Applied Linguistics and teaches courses in linguistics and English as an Additional Language for prospective teachers. Her research interests include issues in second language writing, teacher education, and the acquisition of second language literacy by adults with limited first language literacy. She is currently secretary on the board of directors of LESLLA (Literacy Education and Second Language Learning for Adults), the professional association. Her work has appeared in the Annual Review of Applied Linguistics, International Journal of English Studies, and Language.

Carolina Pelaez-Morales is associate professor of TESOL and Writing at Columbus State University, where she teaches courses in TESOL and Composition. She holds a Ph.D. in English from Purdue University. Her research focuses on inclusive ESOL teaching strategies, teacher education, and multiliteracies in non-English speaking countries. Her work has been published in Journal of Second Language Writing, Language and Education Journal, the Boğ aziç i University Journal of Education, and the Journal of Writing Teacher Education. She is also co-editor, with Kyle McIntosh and Tony Silva, of the collection Graduate studies in second language writing (2015, Parlor Press) and a contributor to books like Preparing teachers to work with English language learners in mainstream classrooms and The internationalization of U.S. writing programs.