# Researching first and second language genre learning: A comparative review and a look ahead

Christine M. Tardy

Department of English, DePaul University, 802 W. Belden Avenue, Chicago, IL 60614, United States

# Abstract

With genre now viewed as a fundamental element of writing, both second language writing and mainstream composition studies have seen an increased focus on the question of how writers learn genres. The purpose of this paper is to review key findings from 60 empirical studies that have investigated this question. To this point, research has typically studied genre learning as it occurs either through professional or disciplinary practice or through classroom instruction; almost no studies have looked at the same writers as they traverse these multiple domains. I therefore categorize studies as taking place in either ‘‘practicebased’’ or ‘‘instructional’’ settings and identify trends in the research findings from each setting. After examining one study which takes place in multiple settings, I tease out some of the commonalities and distinctions between learning in practice-based and instructional contexts and between first language and second language genre learning. On the basis of this comparative review of research, I suggest future directions for the interdisciplinary study of genre learning.

$©$ 2006 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Genre learning; Genre research; Disciplinary writing development; L1/L2 comparisons

Over the past two decades, genre has increasingly taken center stage in both first language composition studies and second language writing. Contemporary genre theory goes beyond descriptions of text types to consideration of a more complex social construct which shapes and is shaped by human activity. Writing scholars now have a more nuanced understanding of the ways in which textual forms, goals, and exigencies interact with individuals, communities, and institutions to give rise to these ‘‘things’’ we call genre. Writing teachers have witnessed a profusion of the term in composition textbooks and teacher education resources, and it has become a central principle of much writing pedagogy for both first language (L1) and second language (L2) classrooms.

With this growing interest in and acceptance of genre as fundamental to writing, the question of how individuals build knowledge of genres becomes crucial. A fairly sizable number of studies have investigated how writers develop genre or discourse knowledge through situated practice (i.e., through participation in workplace or disciplinary activity), but fewer studies have looked at this development within writing classrooms or, more importantly, in both of these often coexisting domains. An even more critical gap may be the lack of a comprehensive synthesis and comparison of genre learning1 of L1 and L2 writers both in and out of classroom instructional settings. Such a review is important at this juncture in the field of genre studies because it will allow scholars and teachers to take stock of what we know about different contexts and populations and where we might go from here.

The remainder of this paper therefore brings together findings from 60 studies that focus— either explicitly or implicitly—on the development of genre and/or disciplinary discourse knowledge (see Table 1). These studies investigate different writers (L1 and L2) at different levels (novices through near-experts, children through adults) engaged in different contexts (both academic and workplace). While the majority of the studies focus on writing development, a small number focusing on reading have also been included because they make explicit connections between these two literate activities. The primary goal of my analysis is twofold: first, to identify trends in genre learning across contexts and learner groups, and second, to suggest future directions for the interdisciplinary study of genre learning.

I must acknowledge up front that the categories in Table 1 are somewhat fluid and at times difficult to distinguish—particularly those of L1 versus L2 genre learning. Although distinctions between L1 and L2 writers greatly simplify a much more complex phenomenon, I retain the distinction here as a heuristic for understanding the differences in the more clear-cut cases of L1 and L2 writing; there will certainly be a great deal of variation in the extent to which individuals fall on either side of the language continuum. Throughout the review, I will therefore make note of learners or learning contexts which do not easily fit into the basic categories used in the table.

The review includes works whose main focus is an empirical study of the learning of genre or specialized discourse; therefore, works whose primary focus is genre analysis (e.g., Flowerdew, 2002) or the sharing of teaching approaches rather than on a data-driven exploration of student learning (see, especially, chapters in Johns [2002] and Herrington and Moran [2005]) are not included, although they do provide important insights into genre learning. I have also excluded relevant works which do not offer a sufficient description of data and/or data analysis to support the given conclusions, as well as research reports which reiterate data and findings from a study already included in the corpus. Lastly, I need to acknowledge that my final list of studies is influenced by my own resource availability and thus includes primarily articles and chapters published in journals and books widely circulated within North America, though I have made an effort to include research conducted in non-American contexts. As such, works published in local or national journals that were difficult for me to locate or obtain have unfortunately been excluded. Obviously, reviews of studies published in contexts like Australia or South America would be particularly valuable in expanding our growing knowledge base, and I hope that others might feel motivated to take on such a task.

Table 1 Empirical studies reviewed   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Studies in practice-based contexts</td></tr><tr><td>Young learners</td><td>Chapman (1994) Hicks (1990) Kamberelis and Bovino (1999) Kamberelis (1999) Shine and Roser (1999)</td></tr><tr><td>Secondary school students. Undergraduate students</td><td>Beaufort (2004) Currie (1993)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Dias et al. (1999) Doheny-Farina (1989) Faigley and Hansen (1985) Fishman and McCarthy (2001) Freedman (1987) Freedman and Adam (1996) Giltrow and Valiquette (1994) Haas (1994) Herrington (1985) Ivanic (1998) Leki (1995) Leki (2003) Leki and Carson (1997) McCarthy (1987) Spack (1997) Belcher (1994)</td></tr><tr><td>Graduate Students</td><td>Berkenkotter et al. (1988) Blakeslee (1997) Casanave (1995) Casanave (2002) Connor and Mayberry (1996) Dias et al. (1999) Dong (1996) Dong (1998) Francis and Hallam (2000) Gentil (2005) Gosden (1996) Leki (1995) Leki and Carson (1997) Prior (1998) Riazi (1997) Samraj (2000) Schneider and Fujishima (1995) Shaw (1991)</td></tr><tr><td>Professionals/Interns</td><td>Tardy (2005) Beaufort (1999) Beaufort (2000) Dias et al. (1999)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Gosden (1998)   
Hyon (2001)   
Hyon (2002)   
Sengupta (1999)   
Hansen (2000)   
Leki and Carson (1997)

Doheny-Farina (1989) Flowerdew (2000) Freedman and Adam (1996) MacKinnon (1993)

Table 1 (Continued )   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Studies in practice-based contexts</td><td>Studies in instructional contexts</td></tr><tr><td>Pare (2000)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Parks (2000a)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Smart (2000)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Winsor (1996)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Winsor (2001)</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Studies focusing on multilingual/L2 writers appear in boldface. Dias et al. (1999), Doheny-Farina (1989), Freedman and Adam (1996), Leki (1995), and Leki and Carson (1997) appear in the chart multiple times because they study diverse groups of writers and contexts.

Because of the distinct differences between studies which explore learning in ‘‘practice-based’’ contexts and those which explore learning through specific instructional approaches, I group the studies into these two major categories. After discussing the key issues from these two contexts, I discuss one study that has investigated genre learning through both practice and instruction, and then outline some of the crucial distinctions between learning genres in practice-based and instructional contexts and between learning genres in an L1 and L2. Finally, I draw upon this synthesis of research to consider pertinent unanswered questions regarding genre learning.

# 1. Findings from practice-based contexts

A growing body of research has investigated empirically how learners build genre knowledge through practice within educational, disciplinary, or workplace domains. These studies, in other words, have explored how genres are learned in natural (i.e., non-manipulated) settings, including classrooms, research, internships, and other workplaces. They do not investigate the influence of a particular teaching technique or approach, but instead consider how writers draw on the various resources within their learning environment.

The 47 practice-based studies described below draw most often on social theories of learning, such as situated learning, activity theory, or cognitive apprenticeship. The work is multidisciplinary, coming from fields like professional writing, rhetoric and composition, applied linguistics, and education. All age groups have been studied, from preschool through experienced professionals. Below, I categorize the major findings that can be gleaned from these studies into nine sub-sections. Rather than outlining the details of each individual study within these sub-sections, I have tried to report general trends; specific findings, when described, are intended to be representative or particularly illustrative.

# 1.1. Experience and practice

Several studies have concluded that learners draw on their experiences in prior and current practice when building knowledge of genres. These investigations include experimental studies of preschool and elementary school children (Chapman, 1994; Hicks, 1990; Kamberelis, 1999; Kamberelis & Bovino, 1999; Shine & Roser, 1999), as well as case studies of undergraduate writers (Faigley & Hansen, 1985; Freedman, 1987; Freedman & Adam, 1996; Herrington, 1985; Ivanicˇ, 1998; McCarthy, 1987; Spack, 1997), engineering interns (Winsor, 2001), workplace writers (Beaufort, 1999; Dias, Freedman, Medway, & Pare´, 1999; MacKinnon, 1993), graduate students (Berkenkotter, Huckin, & Ackerman, 1988; Blakeslee, 1997), and a recent doctoral graduate (Flowerdew, 2000). Other studies have indicated that a rhetorical understanding of texts may also be developed through increased disciplinary knowledge, which is in turn developed through increased disciplinary participation (Haas, 1994; Tardy, 2005). Experience and practice may also lead to more routinized composing processes and greater efficiency in approaching writing tasks (Beaufort, 2004).

Even prior encounters with different genres may be influential in building genre awareness. For example, Palmquist (2005) has shown how novice Web page writers draw on previous experience with print genres when creating unfamiliar hypertext genres. He also found that those with more extensive exposure to a range of print genres were better at differentiating among Web genres. In a very different context, Myhill (2005) found that when British children (writing in their L1) approached new genres in school, they drew on various types of prior knowledge, including formal schemata, sociocultural knowledge, and visual/semiotic knowledge. In other words, experience and practice in a range of domains and genres can come to bear on writers’ experiences with unfamiliar genres.

Examining specifically the impact of repeated writing practice on disciplinary writing skills, Johnstone, Ashbaugh, and Warfield’s (2002) quasi-experimental study compared the writing of a large sample of accounting and business undergraduates (in their 2nd through 4th years) on a memo-writing task. The accounting students, who were a part of a writing-in-the-disciplines (WID) initiative, had been exposed to more repeated writing experiences throughout their undergraduate schooling. These students performed better than the business students overall on the memo-writing task, with senior-level accounting students performing even better. Statistical analysis shows that as students moved up through the schooling ranks, specific writing experiences (gained primarily through writing-intensive courses) were stronger predictors of writing skills than was general cognitive ability. This study provides some support for the importance of the type of repeated practice that can be gained through writing-intensive curricula.

Taking a more situated and historical perspective, Ivanicˇ (1998) traces the voices that her mature undergraduate writers draw upon (from written texts, classroom lectures, and even social conversations) to show how repertoires of voices are built through past experiences and encounters. These prior experiences may at times, however, inhibit learning. In Blakeslee’s (1997) case study of a multilingual graduate student, for example, the student’s prior experiences with writing technical documents or progress reports were sometimes at odds with the rhetorical expectations he later encountered in writing a journal article; writers’ ‘‘residual practices’’ could then work as obstacles as well as strategies. An international graduate student in Leki’s (1995) study similarly found relying on past experiences of writing for other professors to be an unsuccessful strategy at times, leading him to misjudge expectations for classroom assignments. Finally, Berkenkotter et al.’s (1988) study shows how an L1 graduate student experienced conflicts between his prior practices (using primarily expressive writing) and those necessary for participation in his new social science discourse community.

That practice-based studies have found experience and practice to be important in learning genre is not surprising; it is indeed unlikely that learners will develop knowledge of genre without such experience. Furthermore, because many of the studies here set out to investigate practice, as opposed to instruction or other influences on genre knowledge, the finding that practice plays an important role in knowledge development is in many ways derivative of the research focus itself.

# 1.2. Oral interactions

As part of their experiences and practices, writers interact—sometimes extensively—with peers and experts, and these oral interactions often play a powerful role in developing genre knowledge for both L1 and L2 writers. Interactions found to be influential include discussions with peers (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Casanave, 1995; Chapman, 1994; Connor & Mayberry, 1996; Doheny-Farina, 1989; Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; Freedman, 1987; Gentil, 2005; McCarthy, 1987; Prior, 1998), workplace interactions (Dias et al., 1999; Smart, 2000), and oral feedback and interactions with experts or mentors (Casanave, 1995; Flowerdew, 2000; Ivanicˇ, 1998; MacKinnon, 1993; McCarthy, 1987; Pare´, 2000; Parks, 2000a; Riazi, 1997; Shaw, 1991; Spack, 1997; Winsor, 1996). Oral interactions may help learners develop increased understanding of the thinking processes of a discourse community by implicitly modeling those processes in interactions with experts—often instructors (Doheny-Farina, 1989; Freedman & Adam, 1996). At the same time, it should not be assumed that learners will experience oral interactions in equivalent ways; case study research (by its very nature) has highlighted, for example, the extent to which participation in and learning through oral interactions is a highly individualized process (Casanave, 1995, 2002; Smart, 2000).

One key element of oral interactions may be that they help learners get ‘‘plugged into’’ the network of activities that surround them (Winsor, 2001), giving them access to the community and thereby increasing their genre knowledge (Flowerdew, 2000; Riazi, 1997; Shaw, 1991). Even informal social uses of language can contribute to development of academic literacy skills in a second language, helping learners develop L2 fluency and their general linguistic repertoires (Gentil, 2005). Drawing on diverse methodologies, including case studies, surveys, and interviews, some studies have suggested that international multilingual graduate students are often isolated from social networks, thereby making community access increasingly difficult (Dong, 1996, 1998; Shaw, 1991). Students who isolate themselves may become entangled in a vicious circle in which they avoid interactions because of low proficiency or lack of confidence in their L2, thereby losing out on future opportunities for language improvement (Schneider & Fujishima, 1995).

# 1.3. Textual interactions

Workplace and academic writers often participate in textually saturated practice; that is, much of what they do revolves around texts. These interactions with texts are often significant in learning genres. Several studies have found that very young learners (Chapman, 1994; Hicks, 1990; Kamberelis, 1999; Kamberelis & Bovino, 1999; Shine & Roser, 1999) as well as undergraduate and graduate students (Currie, 1993; Freedman, 1987; Freedman & Adam, 1996; Haas, 1994) build genre and rhetorical knowledge through their interactions with genre texts. That is, as writers are exposed to other texts, they build an implicit knowledge of those texts. Studies like Kamberelis (1999) and Kamberelis and Bovino (1999) employ powerful quantitative-qualitative methodologies resulting in very robust findings. Their studies of young L1 learners, for example, have found that children hold more implicit knowledge of story genres than of science report genres because they have so much more exposure to stories. Similarly, one small-scale study of L1 graduate students suggested that the difficulties experienced in reading and comprehending new academic genres were primarily due to a lack of previous exposure and familiarity (Francis & Hallam, 2000).

In addition to this tacit knowledge built through exposure, some learners draw quite consciously on textual models. This learning strategy has been found among L1 undergraduates (Ivanicˇ, 1998; McCarthy, 1987; Palmquist, 2005), L1 and L2 graduate students (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Gentil, 2005; Leki, 1995; Palmquist, 2005; Prior, 1998; Riazi, 1997; Shaw, 1991; Tardy, 2005), and L1 workplace writers (Beaufort, 2000; Pare´, 2000; Smart, 2000; Winsor, 1996). The multilingual graduate student writers in these studies turned specifically to published models when they approached new genres in English, borrowing discourses and textual fragments from these texts. Multilingual graduate students in several studies have kept lists of formulaic expressions found in published writing (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Gosden, 1996; Shaw, 1991).

Ivanicˇ (1998) sees this patching together of other voices as a strategy that writers use to gain access to academic communities. At the same time, Freedman (1987) found that L1 students in the undergraduate law class that she studied made no conscious attempt to look at sample texts as they approached unfamiliar genres; nevertheless, Freedman notes that past and current reading contributed to their ‘‘dimly felt sense’’ of academic discourse conventions. Freedman’s conclusion, like most of the others cited here, appears to be based on evidence from oral interviews in which writers described their use of models.

Learners look to other texts not only as genre models but also as resources. For example, they may rely on their own previously written work (Blakeslee, 1997; Dong, 1996; Freedman, 1987; Prior, 1998), assignment guidelines (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Riazi, 1997), class handouts and notes (Casanave, 1995; Riazi, 1997), style manuals (Dong, 1996), or even their own earlier drafts (Casanave, 1995). Such texts serve as resources for building meta-knowledge about specific genres that learners are required to write. One final caveat should be mentioned about claims made regarding writers’ uses of texts. While most of the studies here included texts as part of their collected data, textual evidence rarely backs up the claims made in the research reports. Only Ivanicˇ (1998) and Prior (1998) provide extensive analysis of the writers’ texts, attempting to trace the voices and discourses that have come to bear on them. If drawing upon other texts is, however, an important strategy for genre knowledge development, textual analysis offers an important means for understanding more about how this strategy is used.

# 1.4. Composing strategies

A small number of studies have looked specifically to the composing strategies of writers learning new genres. Some studies have found that at least some L2 writers translate from their L1 when composing in English (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Gosden, 1996; Shaw, 1991)— though Shaw’s (1991) study of L2 dissertation writers in Britain suggests that this strategy may be more prevalent for those studying in non-Inner Circle countries. Both Gosden’s and Shaw’s findings are based on interview data, while Angelova and Riazantseva’s appear to be drawn from interviews and reflective writing journals kept by the participants; ethnographic or observational research that focuses additionally on social interactions or behavioral practices may shed more light on the actual composing processes that writers adopt in different settings and for different genres. Leki’s (2003) case study of a nursing student writing in her L2, for example, illustrates the writer’s frustration at spending hours revising her classroom-assigned ‘‘nursing care plans’’ for language correctness, while her L1 peers spent a fraction of the time on the same assignments.

# 1.5. Instruction and feedback

Among the studies that took place outside of classroom instruction, a handful have found that writers desire explicit discussion of genre conventions and expectations. Even very advanced multilingual graduate students, for example, sometimes feel that such discussion could serve to unveil the mysteriousness of their task (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Blakeslee, 1997). Instructor feedback did appear to help a multilingual writer in Gentil’s (2005) study learn the practices for making knowledge claims in her academic field; interestingly, feedback provided in

English (the writer’s L2) influenced both the writer’s French- and English-language writing. One of the L1 professional writers in Beaufort’s (1999) study found instruction to be helpful primarily in that it demystified what she had already learned through practice, thereby deepening her genre knowledge. The L1 engineering interns in Winsor’s (2001) study also made use of formal workplace training on topics as diverse as presentation making and diesel engines. The students in this study liked the efficiency of such instruction, although their learning in this context more commonly took place through mentoring and practice—likely because internships are structured around the goal of providing learners with hands-on experience.

The L1 undergraduate law students in Freedman’s (1987) study, on the other hand, largely ignored any explicit instruction from their disciplinary instructors when it was given, paying attention instead only to the grade assigned to their essay. It was this form of feedback (i.e., the grade) that students used to revise and build their knowledge of genres. Freedman concludes that because the students’ genre knowledge developed without following the teacher’s guidelines from class, instruction is generally unnecessary—a claim that assumes a somewhat narrow view of instruction. A further inconsistency in this conclusion lies in a description of a participant who did express a desire for some explicit instruction, or at least explanation, of genre characteristics. This student went to the university writing center for assistance and became frustrated because her tutorial did not illuminate the unique characteristics of the genre (a law essay), saying that the tutorial ‘‘didn’t tell me what was special about it.’’ (p. 105).

The contradictions outlined in the studies above illustrate the need for a greater understanding of this issue. Specifically, studies often lack clear definitions of what counts as ‘‘explicit instruction’’ and at times make conclusions about the value of such instruction based on its absence, allowing only for conjecture about what students might do if instruction were available.

# 1.6. Transferability and conflict

The issue of transfer is highlighted in many studies of genre learning. A common finding has been that learners often have difficulty transferring skills developed in one domain to another. This difficulty has been seen most often among L1 and L2 undergraduates who are unable to apply what they learn about writing from one disciplinary course to another (Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; McCarthy, 1987; Spack, 1997). Smart (2000) found that experienced workplace writers at the Bank of Canada also experienced difficulties when faced with unfamiliar genres embedded in new rhetorical situations, struggling with issues such as content or language. He concludes that, even for experts, ‘‘writing expertise is not easily transferable from one domain of discourse to another’’ (p. 245), and that learning expertise in new domains requires learners to play new roles.

Perhaps one element that impedes transfer of learning is the conflicting expectations that writers face within local communities. Students, for example, face divergent expectations between the multiple disciplines in which they participate (Fishman & McCarthy, 2001; Giltrow & Valiquette, 1994), or even from different professors and courses within one discipline (Casanave, 2002; Gentil, 2005; Herrington, 1985; Samraj, 2000). To further complicate matters, students and their professors may have different perceptions of assigned tasks (Prior, 1998; Riazi, 1997) or conventions (Herrington, 1985), and individual professors may contribute to multiple and conflicting interpretations of their own tasks (Prior, 1991). In some cases, students may not note differences in class expectations or genres and may transfer conventions from one class to another inappropriately (Herrington, 1985). Once again, the findings here are based primarily— though not exclusively—on the writers’ discussions in interviews rather than on their actual writing. It is possible that the writers may transfer particular discourse or genre patterns without an awareness of doing so. The issue of transferability therefore continues to be a vexing one for both research and pedagogy.

# 1.7. Dimensions of genre knowledge

Studies that investigate the development of genre knowledge commonly distinguish among its various dimensions, offering insight into the nature of such knowledge. It may be the case, for example, that learners develop different types of knowledge at different stages or in different settings. When approaching new genres, writers may draw initially on ‘‘general knowledge’’ (such as standard written English or general document design principles) because they lack local or context-specific knowledge (Beaufort, 2000); some studies suggest that this local knowledge can be learned only through immersion and experience in specific contexts (Freedman, Adam, & Smart, 1994; Smart, 2000). Increased exposure to genres may also give learners access to more global or macro knowledge of generic structure (Hicks, 1990; Kamberelis, 1999); micro-level knowledge of features like logical connectors may be slower to develop, at least in young learners (Kamberelis, 1999).

A further distinction has been made between formal knowledge and rhetorical knowledge. For example, Winsor (1996) found that L1 interns’ surface-level knowledge of generic form preceded their development of rhetorical knowledge. In a rather cyclical process, increased rhetorical knowledge, or familiarity with a given context, may also lead to deepened knowledge of form and procedure (Beaufort, 1999; MacKinnon, 1993). It is this rhetorical (or social) knowledge that Freedman et al. (1994) claim cannot be explicitly taught; such knowledge may instead develop naturally through increased participation in a discourse community (Haas, 1994). Rhetorical knowledge also includes cultural knowledge, a dimension which may pose particular challenges for L2 writers whose prior experiences come from different sociocultural contexts (Leki, 2003). Traditionally, scholars have drawn a distinction between declarative knowledge (i.e., knowledge about something) and procedural knowledge (i.e., knowledge carried out in the practice of doing something), a distinction explored by Berkenkotter et al. (1988) in their case study of ‘‘Nate.’’ The study found Nate to build declarative knowledge earlier than procedural knowledge, though suggesting that the procedural knowledge was in fact derived from the declarative knowledge. Procedural knowledge, the authors believe, was more difficult to build and was influenced more by sociocultural factors such as prior experiences.

One knowledge dimension that has received relatively little attention is subject-matter knowledge. Some longitudinal studies, for example, have pointed out that as writers’ understanding of their subject matter increases, they gain increased rhetorical knowledge (Haas, 1994) or control over a genre’s form (Beaufort, 1999; Spack, 1997); one 3-year case study of an undergraduate L1 writer, however, found that while the student did build some subject-matter knowledge over time, he still had difficulty applying disciplinary ways of thinking to his written work (Beaufort, 2004). The interaction of subject-matter expertise and genre knowledge is of particular importance in school settings where student writing may be evaluated more for content by disciplinary instructors and more for written form by writing instructors (Faigley & Hansen, 1985; Leki & Carson, 1997).

# 1.8. Mentoring

At advanced, professional stages, support from mentors may play a key role in genre learning. Through mentoring, novices (both L1 and L2) can gain guided and increased practice, interaction, collaboration, and feedback (Beaufort, 1999; Freedman & Adam, 1996; Haas, 1994;

Pare´, 2000; Parks, 2000a; Tardy, 2005; Winsor, 2001). Such support, however, is not a guaranteed path to success. An array of case studies have shown how mentoring relationships are influenced by the style of individual mentors (Belcher, 1994), the distribution of power and authority (Blakeslee, 1997; Gosden, 1996; Pare´, 2000; Prior, 1991), previous cultural and educational experiences (Angelova & Riazantseva, 1999; Connor & Mayberry, 1996), goals and expectations (Dong, 1998; Fishman & McCarthy, 2001), and geographic and linguistic distance (Flowerdew, 2000)—all of which may constrain the extent to which novices learn through mentoring. These concerns have been expressed primarily in the context of studies with L2 writers. One survey study found L2 graduate students to voice a greater need for mentoring from their advisors than did their L1 peers, but those same L2 writers often had expectations of mentoring that diverged from their advisors’ (Dong, 1998).

# 1.9. Individuality and identity

Despite the commonalities among individual instances of a genre, writers often exert their own unique style in composing genres. Such individuality is apparent in the texts of very young L1 writers (Chapman, 1994) as well as in more mature L1 writers (Ivanicˇ, 1998). Repeatedly, studies focusing on genre knowledge development also comment on the extent to which the process involves the development of a new identity. As they develop genre skills, L1 and L2 learners often build a sense of themselves as members of an academic discipline (Berkenkotter et al., 1988; Casanave, 2002; Dong, 1996; Haas, 1994; Ivanicˇ, 1998), and students may try to relate task goals to their own sense of identity within the community (Riazi, 1997). Individuals, however, respond to disciplinary training in very different ways (Casanave, 1995), with some embracing their new identities and others resisting (Berkenkotter et al., 1988; Casanave, 2002; Doheny-Farina, 1989; Tardy, 2005). It is critical to note, however, that an emphasis on individuals and their sense of identity is likely to be a by-product of case study research. All of the above studies focus on a small number of individuals and naturally highlight the individual over the community in their goal of understanding individual practices.

# 2. Findings from instructional contexts

Classroom-based instructional contexts have been a far less common domain of study within genre learning research, perhaps due to difficulties of access or research design. Instruction-based studies have been conducted in reading and writing classrooms, as well as in disciplinary courses like psychology or biology. The studies in this group have a common focus on the influences of instructional techniques—some explicit, others more implicit—on writers’ genre learning.

Although diverse, pedagogies which address the centrality of genre share a belief that an awareness of texts’ forms, functions, and social contexts will facilitate learners’ development of expertise (Hyland, 2003). Despite some differences in underlying theories and pedagogical practices, advocates for genre-based approaches are found in L1 composition (Bawarshi, 2003; Devitt, 2004), L1/L2 writing in the disciplines (Johns, 1997), English for Specific Purposes (ESP) (Hyland, 2003; Swales, 1990), and primary and secondary school literacy learning (Cope & Kalantzis, 1993; Martin & Rothery, 1993). (See Hyon [1996] and Paltridge [2001], for more detailed discussions of these orientations.)

Criticisms of genre-based teaching include the potential danger of reifying the power structures in which genres are embedded (Benesch, 1995, 2001; Pennycook, 1997), an overemphasis on mastery of genres as access to power (Luke, 1996), the impossibility of knowing and teaching ever-shifting disciplinary ideologies (Spack, 1988; Freedman, 1993a), and the vital role of disciplinary participation in learning disciplinary genres (Spack, 1988; Freedman et al., 1994). While these criticisms serve as justifiable challenges and necessary counter-voices, their applicability depends on the ways in which an individual teacher enacts genre-based teaching in his or her classroom. Approaches which stress rhetorical consciousness raising, student-driven ethnographic and textual discovery, and critical genre analysis can address many (if not all) of these concerns.

One of the most well-known discussions of the role of genre in the classroom (particularly within North America) is a series of articles appearing in a 1993 issue of Research in the Teaching of English (see Fahnestock [1993], Freedman [1993a, 1993b], Williams and Colomb [1993]). In her call for empirical investigations of ‘‘explicit teaching’’ of genre, Freedman (1993b) states unequivocally: ‘‘It should not be the task of the skeptics to argue against a pedagogic strategy but rather the work of the proponents to bring forward convincing research and theoretical evidence—preferably before its wholesale introduction’’ (p. 279). Despite the echoing of this need for more empirical research (Hyland, 2000; Hyon, 1996; Parks, 2001), studies of genre and instruction have so far remained primarily theoretical and anecdotal; the 13 studies described here are the exceptions.

The studies described below are quite disparate in terms of participants’ ages, instructional contexts, and research methods; they include classrooms that adopt an overtly ‘‘genre-based approach’’ as well as instructional techniques that are used to teach genres within the contexts of a disciplinary content course. Because these studies are of such great interest to writing instructors, are even more diverse in methodology than the practice-based studies, and often have considerable limitations, more details about their populations and designs will be given than was provided in the previous section. The categories below represent an attempt to find connections among these instruction-based studies, yet these connections are at times weak. Although the five categories below roughly parallel categories defined in the discussion of practice-based studies, the findings themselves are not always equivalent.

# 2.1. Prior experience and exposure

Like practice-based studies, several instruction-based studies have found that learners are influenced by their previous experience with or exposures to genres. For example, in a study of L1 and L2 fifth graders, Reppen (1995) found that students initially wanted to write most texts (even persuasive or expository texts) as stories—a genre to which they had a great deal of exposure. Her finding corroborates those in the previous section that found that more exposure to story genres served to increase L1 children’s familiarity with that genre over others. Nevertheless, in Reppen’s study, explicit instruction and guided support in non-story genres helped raise students’ awareness of how different texts are used to respond to different tasks.

Still, the relationship between prior exposure and classroom instruction is not clear. For instance, Hyon’s (2001) study of an EAP reading class for L2 undergraduate and graduate students suggests that genre-based teaching may have less of an impact for students who have greater genre knowledge prior to instruction. Because the study includes only a small number of participants in a very specific context, the claim remains tentative, yet certainly worthy of further research.

# 2.2. Textual modeling

While many studies in practice-based contexts have found that learners often use models as a strategy for learning genres, some instruction-based studies have investigated the effects of models on students’ reading and writing performance. Charney and Carlson (1995) explored the extent to which exposure to model texts influenced L1 undergraduates’ disciplinary writing in a psychology course. Students were asked to write a methods section based on detailed information about a particular experiment; one group was given student-written models of a methods section while the other group was not. Although the availability of models did not seem to help the writers discriminate between necessary and unnecessary details, it did appear to positively influence the content and organization of students’ own written texts. Interestingly, there appeared to be no advantage to receiving all highly rated models versus models exhibiting a range of quality. Unfortunately, because this study was conducted within a one-hour time frame, it offers no insights into the long-term effects of such instructional influences.

In an experimental study of first-year university students in Israel, Hanauer (1998) looked at the influences of three different educational methods (one which utilized prototypical texts as models) on the development of students’ genre knowledge of poetry in English (their L2). Hanauer found that the students who received models were significantly different from the control group in their ratings of ‘‘poeticity’’ and organization, but they were not different from the two groups that received other instructional methods. Several caveats regarding this conclusion need to be offered: there is no clear evidence that one instructional method was superior to the other two; the time frame of the study is extremely limited; and the genres of focus are postmodern poems, rather than non-literary genres like the other studies I have reviewed.

In a third experimental study of models in classroom instruction, Henry and Roseberry (1998) examine the effects of genre-based ESP instruction on students in a first-year management class in Brunei learning the ‘‘brief tourist information’’ genre. The students who received six hours of genre-based instruction, which included analysis of models, had higher ‘‘texture’’ scores (an index designed to measure cohesion and coherence) in a post-test, and their gain scores were significantly higher than the group with no instruction. This study, again, has several limitations. First, it examines only very short-term benefits and does not consider transfer beyond one specific genre or beyond the classroom. Second, it is unclear whether the measurements in the study actually operationalize genre mastery, as they claim to.

One remaining question regarding the role of models in genre learning relates to the writers’ intentions in drawing upon models—that is, do students draw upon models in order to learn the genre or merely to reproduce a text that would seem to fit the course requirements? The studies here do not draw such a distinction, though doing so would be beneficial in future work. With the various limitations to the research described here, any conclusions about textual modeling in instruction are tenuous. At the same time, these three studies do suggest that, when given models, students do make use of them in the very short term. This pattern echoes that found in nonclassroom domains, where learners often make use of models as a resource for writing in new genres. What remains unknown is the extent to which knowledge gleaned from classroom models is applied to subsequent tasks either in or out of the classroom.

# 2.3. Explicit instruction

Despite the apparent difficulties with transferability of skills outside of the classroom, many learners see benefits of instruction. At a range of educational levels, at least some learners appear to be motivated by genre-based instruction (Carter, Ferzli, & Wiebe, 2004; Henry & Roseberry, 1998; Hyon, 2001) and can develop a metalanguage for talking about texts through such instruction (Gosden, 1998; Hammond & Macken-Horarik, 1999; Reppen, 1995). Similarly, the rhetorical-consciousness raising of genre-based reading instruction may increase students’ ability to locate information in texts (Hyon, 2002) and develop a better understanding of texts’ rhetorical elements (Hyon, 2002; Sengupta, 1999).

While many studies in instructional contexts compare the use of one ‘‘explicit teaching’’ method to the use of no explicit teaching, Pang (2002) compared two different genre-based approaches. In her study with L2 undergraduates in Hong Kong, a textual-analysis approach and a contextual-awareness approach resulted in a very similar quality of written texts and composing strategies. There were, however, slight differences between the groups, as the textual-analysis group performed somewhat better on the ‘‘mechanistic’’ elements of the genre (under which Pang includes title, format, person and mood, and obligatory ‘‘features’’) while the contextualanalysis group was stronger in rhetorical elements like discourse functions; notably, both groups were largely successful in including obligatory moves, though Pang describes the latter group as demonstrating higher awareness of the function of these moves.

In one of the few studies of genre instruction with L1 undergraduate writers, Carter et al. (2004) describe the effects of an instructional software program which aimed to teach biology students ‘‘the science of the lab’’ and the ‘‘ability to think scientifically about the lab experience’’ (p. 407) through guided pre-writing and writing activities. The program had a positive influence on a treatment group of writers, who learned the scientific concepts of the lab and applied scientific reasoning in their reports more effectively than the students who did not use the program. The researchers caution, however, that their findings may be closely linked to the deep contextualization and intertextual placement of the lab report within the overall course; rather than being encountered as add-ons or extraneous writing tasks, the reports were fully integrated into the course through the software program.

# 2.4. Transferability and conflict

While the studies above offer some encouragement for genre awareness-raising techniques, they give little clue as to how well learners are able to transfer classroom learning to other domains in the long term. But because the goal of instruction is to help learners apply new knowledge to later tasks, transferability is a key issue for teachers. Hyon (2001) found that when the L2 graduate and undergraduate students in her genre-based reading course encountered the same genres after the course had been completed, several students remembered specific genre features taught in the course (1 year earlier) and were able to recognize these features in sample texts. But in addition to encountering similar genres outside of the course and recognizing genre features, writing instructors hope that students can transfer skills gained in the course to outside contexts. In an interview study of undergraduate and graduate L2 writers, Leki and Carson (1997) found that students perceived the focus of their ESL writing classes (linguistic issues, originality, clarity, and engagement) to be quite different from that of their other courses (content over language). Although this disparity does suggest a conflict that may impede transfer, the students generally felt that the focus of their ESL classes was appropriate.

A less optimistic picture emerges from two studies which focus on individuals enrolled in ESP classes struggling to connect their course work to other contexts. Parks (2000b) observed three students completing a project in an ESP tourism course and found that each learner approached the task with quite different motives and strategies. One learner, for example, treated it purely as a course requirement, believing that true L2 competence could only be built in the ‘‘real world.’’ This finding may be unsurprising for learners who are fairly removed from ‘‘real world’’ domains, yet a similar finding is made by Hansen (2000), who studied a graduate student enrolled in two ESL writing classes while concurrently enrolled in disciplinary courses. The student, ‘‘Mei-Huei,’’ enjoyed the intermediate ESL course, in which she was asked to write for nonspecialist audiences but faced much conflict in the advanced course, where tasks demanded she take a more authoritative stance by writing for specialists in her field. Much of this difficulty is not unique to ESL classrooms, as both L1 and L2 graduate students experience this challenge in their writing. But Hansen believes that Mei-Huei’s difficulty arose primarily from what she perceived to be conflicts of audience, purpose, and content knowledge when writing in the advanced ESL course. She was therefore unable to see the relevance of the course to her own disciplinary writing, feeling instead that most of her writing conventions were learned through her content courses and disciplinary reading.

Finally, Sengupta’s (1999) study of genre-based reading instruction in an undergraduate class found that the L2 learners were unable to transfer generic reading knowledge of texts to their writing. These students wanted explicit instruction in how to do so, stating that ‘‘I think I cannot write like [the authors analyzed]—I think that you must teach me how to write like that—so I have not learned this’’ (Sengupta, 1999, p. 307); this finding underscores the difficulty of instructional transfer. Additionally, there is the possibility that learners may transfer skills but in doing so will overgeneralize them—a finding discussed in Hyon (2001). Yet, as Hyon also rightly points out, the possibility of overgeneralization is not a unique concern of instruction and may well occur in other instances.

These studies repeatedly point to the importance of the nature of instructional tasks. The extent to which a task aids a student in learning may be dependent on its authenticity and/or content (Gosden, 1998), as well as the students’ motivation in the task (Hansen, 2000; Parks, 2000b). More generally, the studies here echo findings in practice-based studies that suggest that transfer from one domain to another is, at the very least, difficult for learners; they also illustrate the extent to which a learner’s attitudes toward explicit instruction may influence transfer.

# 2.5. Dimensions of genre knowledge

Just as research in non-classroom domains has often distinguished various dimensions of genre knowledge, so has research in instructional domains. Research suggests that classroom instruction may be most beneficial in facilitating the development of declarative knowledge for L2 writers and readers (Hammond & Macken-Horarik, 1999; Hyon, 2002; Reppen, 1995; Sengupta, 1999). Other studies of both L1 and L2 writers have also suggested that some procedural knowledge may be developed through exposure to model texts (Charney & Carlson, 1995; Hanauer, 1998; Henry & Roseberry, 1998), though the long-term effects of this exposure have not been investigated.

Studies in instructional contexts have tended to focus on formal knowledge of genre, overlooking the more social and rhetorical dimensions. This tendency could stem from an assumption that classroom teaching should focus on formal knowledge over rhetorical knowledge, as form and structure may be easier to teach and assess. The pattern may also be influenced by the heavy bias toward studying second-language instructional contexts, which tend to focus somewhat more on form than L1 classrooms. Exceptions to this pattern are Pang’s (2002) study, which considers both textual and contextual awareness, and Carter et al.’s (2004) study, which examines the development of subject-matter knowledge and disciplinary reasoning.

# 3. Linking practice and classroom contexts

A comparison of studies in practice-based and instructional contexts illustrates the lack of interaction between these domains in terms of empirical research. That is, the former look exclusively to genre learning through practice, while the latter look exclusively to genre learning through instruction. This artificial dichotomy (while practical from a research design perspective) serves to create two largely distinct sets of research findings, overlooking the liminal space in which writers traverse both contexts—and, from a pedagogical perspective, it is precisely this space that is of such importance. Only one study with which I am familiar makes a systematic attempt to link the same learners’ experiences learning genres in both instructional and practice-based contexts, with the goal of understanding their connects and disconnects from the learners’ perspectives.2

Parks (2001) brings these two contexts together in a longitudinal study of francophone nurses in their first year of work at an English-medium hospital. Her study is situated within the time and space of the workplace, but she is able to link it to the classroom through a genre that is taught in school and then used routinely at work: a nursing care plan. The nurses in her study wrote a care plan in response to one case study at three different points: upon arrival at the hospital, after completing a 5-week orientation and 3-week preceptorship, and after 9 months of full-time work. Comparing their three plans (as well as their oral interview comments and samples of workplaceand school-produced documents) at these different stages, Parks is able to discern changes in the nurses’ writing and beliefs about the care plans over time.

For the nurses in this study, experience and practice were important in building genre knowledge. Initially, the nurses’ care plans followed the form that they had been taught in school; by the end of the study, their care plans were modified in specific ways, resembling the form and style used by the other nurses in their units. Both oral and textual interactions were influential in these changes; through collaboration with more experienced nurses and by drawing on the care plans laid out in a care plan book, the newcomers built knowledge of the rhetorical and linguistic features of the genre. The nurses often ended up memorizing care plans that responded to particularly common problems. Parks explicitly refers to the integration of collaboration and routinized writing, believing that:

. . . collaboration may be a factor during the initial appropriation of genres, even for those genres which are ultimately produced in a highly routine manner. Indeed, such scaffolding appears particularly beneficial to second language employees, who do not have the range of language resources on which to draw as native speakers (pp. 425–426).

Unlike the practice-based studies reviewed above, Parks’ study specifically examines how writers transfer skills learned in an instructional context into a workplace setting. These nurses experienced conflicts with the university-taught care plan even before entering the workplace. As students participating in internships at francophone hospitals, for example, they found that few nurses even used the care plans due to lack of time. In their English-medium place of work, the care plans were used but were often simplified and followed some different ‘‘rules’’ than those the nurses had been taught in school. The nurses made these adjustments quickly, so that even in the second interview of the study, their care plans more closely resembled the workplace genres than the classroom genres. In fact, one nurse’s care plan was more simplified in the second interview, but then more detailed (like the classroom care plans) in the third interview. She explained that this was because she had transferred units; in her new unit, the nurses wrote more detailed care plans. In other words, the discrepancies of form that did arise between classroom instruction and workplace practice did not appear to hamper the nurses’ learning, at least not for any significant amount of time. Instead, the nurses responded and adjusted to the workplace demands rather quickly.

Parks’ study is an important contribution to research on how L2 writers develop genre knowledge through participation in both classroom and workplace contexts. It illustrates how learners might experience a single genre at different points in their career, from student-novice to working professional. The study further illuminates the different ways in which learners build knowledge of one genre (in its various institutional contexts) over time, and how they resolve contradictory input to best suit their needs.

# 4. Findings across contexts and learners

One of the problems with researching only practice-based or instructional contexts, or only L1 or L2 writers, is that it becomes difficult to sort out the similarities and differences between learning in these different environments among different populations. A comparison of the key issues identified here shows that while many commonalities exist, there are also some important distinctions.

# 4.1. Comparing practice-based and instructional contexts of learning

Both contexts show prior experience with or exposure to genres to be influential on genre learning, though not always positively. In other words, what learners brings to a new genre—in terms of experience, exposure, practice, or prior knowledge—is important, though we cannot predict if these prior experiences will be positive or negative. Textual interactions also serve a valuable role for learners in both practice-based and instructional contexts, acting as implicit and explicit learning tools. Learners tend to use models productively when they are provided, and they often seek out models when they are not provided. Although the use of other texts as models could potentially constrain writers’ genre learning, this danger has not been borne out in the studies reviewed here.

The benefits of instruction on genres are still somewhat murky. Some—though not all— writers in practice-based studies seem to desire explicit instruction, while studies in instructional settings find that students tend to be motivated by genre-based teaching techniques. Unfortunately, the roots of this motivation are not clear (are students motivated simply to meet course requirements, seeing genre-based instruction as detailing more explicitly how to meet those expectations?), nor does student motivation necessarily mean that the writers will be able to transfer their learning to tasks in different domains or over longer periods of time. Studying transfer of knowledge, however, is quite difficult, as learners may transfer knowledge unconsciously or may be unaware of the origins of knowledge that they have. Research in both practice-based and instructional settings could benefit from more longitudinal work that bridges multiple domains, investigating the issue of transfer in greater depth.

Studies in both settings do acknowledge and often tease out different dimensions of genre knowledge, suggesting the complexity of learning genres. Studies in practice-based settings tend to look at genre learning from a multidimensional perspective, even emphasizing learners’ sociorhetorical knowledge, while studies in classroom settings often focus primarily on development of formal knowledge. The distinction here is crucial because it suggests a real difficulty in comparing learning in the two environments. How can we compare, for example, the learning of disciplinary ways of thinking in the workplace with the learning of text organization in a writing classroom? More useful comparisons could be drawn between studies that consider how the same type(s) of knowledge is learned in multiple settings.

An additional difference between these two settings of research has been the issues or influences which are actually studied. Studies of classroom instruction have had very little to say about the role of oral interactions, mentoring, or identity in genre learning. While these studies’ main focus is on the impact of a particular pedagogical approach, it is also important to know how these other influences affect learning. The disparity here, however, may be more crucially linked to the differences in research design. Longitudinal case studies or ethnographies, used frequently in practice-based contexts, are particularly strong methods for understanding social interactions and identity, but these methods are rarely used in instructional settings. And while practice-based settings might benefit from more mixed-method research (e.g., Kamberelis & Bovino, 1999), instructional settings would be well served by more longitudinal work.

# 4.2. Comparing L1 and L2 writers

Because no studies here make explicit comparisons of L1 and L2 writers, locating the differences becomes an interpretive and inductive task. To make matters more difficult, there are rarely equivalent studies of L1 and L2 writers in similar contexts. For example, practice-based studies of graduate students focus predominantly on L2 writers, while those in the workplace look mainly at L1 writers. An overwhelming majority of instructional studies take place in ESL/ EFL classrooms. An additional complication lies in the problematic dichotomy of ‘‘L1’’ and ‘‘L2,’’ as discussed earlier in this paper. With these caveats in mind, I outline tentative distinctions between L1 and L2 writers below, including both similarities and differences.

Where studies have focused on both L1 and L2 writers in similar contexts, several similarities are apparent. First, previous experience and practice are likely to influence all writers, whether they are writing in their first or second language. Writers may benefit from drawing on these previous experiences and practices, but they may also be hampered by residual practices that conflict with current expectations. Second, transferability does not appear to be exclusively an L1 or L2 issue. That is, learners writing and reading in both their first and second languages often face difficulty transferring knowledge developed in one domain to another. Third, many learners make use of textual interactions in building their genre knowledge. Both L1 and L2 writers seem to build knowledge implicitly through exposure to texts and also make explicit use of model texts to build knowledge of generic structure—though this strategy seems to come up with greater regularity in studies of L2 writers. In the studies reviewed here it was also predominantly L2 writers who drew extensively on other interrelated texts (e.g., assignment guidelines or notes) as resources for genre learning; there is no clear evidence, however, that L1 writers do not draw on similar resources. Finally, studies of all writers refer to different dimensions of genre knowledge, including declarative, procedural, social, rhetorical, disciplinary, and linguistic, to name a few. There is some tendency for studies of L2 writers to focus more on knowledge of linguistic or rhetorical form than on social or disciplinary knowledge, but this tendency is likely due to the applied linguistics (as opposed to rhetoric and composition) orientation of many of these studies.

While there appear to be many similarities between developing genre knowledge in a first language and in a second language, the processes are not equivalent. One area in which differences exist is oral interactions. These interactions, influential in genre learning, are complex, and it is difficult to sort out the various factors that affect any interaction in which an individual engages. These factors include race, class, and gender, as well as linguistic, ethnic, and cultural background. Although L1 and L2 writers, for example, may function similarly within a graduate seminar, instructors (and peers) may respond to these classes or writers very differently. Some of the L2 doctoral students that Shaw (1991) studied felt that their language skills kept them from participating in discussions with their peers; it was precisely these discussions that proved quite fruitful in developing discursive knowledge for the other participants. Academic and/or social isolation may therefore play a large role in academic success (see also Johns and Swales [2002], Myles and Cheng [2003], Sung [2000]), and ‘‘. . . lack of membership and social contact with a professional discourse community may exert more weight on non-native speakers’’ (Dong, 1996, p. 453). It is also true, of course, that L2 writers can benefit from their multilingualism, and this perspective should not be overlooked by researchers, teachers, or L2 writers themselves. Fluency in at least two languages means that these writers may engage in more oral interactions with diverse groups of people, increasing the resources that they can draw on in genre learning. Indeed, the study of biliteracy—specifically, how writers develop and maintain genre skills in multiple languages—is a fruitful yet overlooked area of study (see Gentil [2005] for an insightful discussion of academic biliteracy).

One type of social interaction that appears particularly influential in genre learning is mentoring. While studies have generally found mentoring to be beneficial for L1 writers, they often paint a less-than-rosy picture for L2 writers. These relationships may be more strained by diverging expectations and understandings of the distribution of authority. These strains are more likely to occur in contexts in which the mentor and mentee do not share similar prior experience in mentoring. Studies in these contexts often stress that much of the responsibility lies on the mentors in understanding more about the influences on such relationships (Belcher, 1994).

The study of composing strategies in relation to genres has focused on L2 writers rather than L1 writers. However, it is safe to say that L1 and L2 composing processes will often differ (Silva, 1993). For example, in the studies here, only the L2 writers mined other texts for conventional expressions and terms. Furthermore, even advanced L2 writers may draw on their L1 when writing generic texts, a process that can have both positive and negative effects (Cumming, 1995; Grabe & Kaplan, 1996). L2 writers may also face additional contextual constraints in the composing process of texts like scholarly publications, such as those resulting from geographic distance and a current geopolitical situation in which center (native-English-speaking) scholars hold virtual control over the publishing process (Canagarajah, 2002; Kaplan, 2001). These contextual constraints are a very real part of the composing process and must not be excluded from an understanding of L2 writing.

Explicit instruction may very well play a different role for L2 writers as well. While some L1 writers do express some need for or use of explicit instruction, L2 writers may have an even stronger desire for such instruction in order to demystify the ‘‘rules’’ of specialized writing. Numerous studies have indeed found that L2 writers may be less inhibited by and make more use of teacher feedback than L1 writers (Grabe & Kaplan, 1996). In addition, explicit instruction in L2 contexts often goes beyond genre, also including linguistic elements like vocabulary or language structure—elements that are less likely to be a concern for L1 writers.

# 5. Future directions

Although empirical research of genre learning has increased in the past decade, several gaps remain—Table 1 visually illustrates some of these holes. For instance, there is a dearth of studies at the secondary school level overall and of L2 writers in the early grades of elementary school. There is also a need for research on L2 writers in the workplace and in undergraduate content courses, and of L1 writers at the graduate-student level. Finally, there is a lack of studies investigating formal instruction for professionals. Workplace education, including ESP training (which is often genre-based), would be particularly useful to study. Such instruction is most often embedded within the work environment, creating optimal conditions for learning transfer.

The second language writers in the studies here tend to come from the more prototypical populations of international graduate students studying in Inner Circle countries or EFL learners studying in Outer or Expanding Circle countries. These writers differ in important ways from recent immigrants or the growing population of so-called ‘‘Generation $1 . 5 '$ (long-term resident English language learners) in secondary and tertiary school contexts (Harklau, Losey, & Siegal, 1999). Research into these groups, as well as single studies that include both L1 and L2 writers are necessary in developing a more complex understanding of how different populations of writers both resemble and contrast with one another.

The studies above highlight some of the dimensions of genre knowledge that learners may develop, and they suggest that these dimensions might be developed quite differently. Can declarative knowledge be facilitated through instruction, and if so, can it then serve as a scaffold for building procedural knowledge outside of the classroom? Future research might focus on questions like this and on the interaction between subject-matter knowledge and rhetorical and formal knowledge. Theoretical models of expertise suggest that these knowledge types interact with and respond to one another (e.g., Bhatia, 2004; Geisler, 1994), but further empirical attention to this interaction would likely prove fruitful in understanding the complexity of genre learning.

Future studies might also explore if or how writers transfer genre knowledge or writing strategies learned through instruction to their own practice. Many writing classrooms focus on the development of composing strategies, linguistic and grammatical skills, or social and procedural elements of genre; when these areas are addressed, what type of influence do they have on students’ subsequent practices? Importantly, none of the studies here investigate genre-based approaches that teach students how to learn (rather than teaching specific genre features) through methods like genre analysis or ethnography (as advocated by, for example, Devitt [2004], Johns [1997], or Swales [1990]). This type of ‘‘explicit instruction’’ aims to provide students with tools for uncovering the localized and rhetorical nature of genres in any setting, but empirical research has yet to corroborate the argument that such tools learned in the classroom support later learning. A stronger research base in the influences of instruction (of various types) on learners’ subsequent generic practices will provide writing teachers with important insight into how knowledge is developed in and also transcends multiple domains of use.

Finally, future research can benefit from more mixed-method approaches to inquiry. Qualitative changes in writers’ knowledge development are perhaps best studied through interviews or intertextual analysis, but quantitative methods offer additional tools for measuring changes in genre knowledge. These designs have typically measured very short-term change (taking place in as little as one hour), but using these tools longitudinally, paired with other qualitative measures, could offer powerful insights into learners’ knowledge changes over time. As an interdisciplinary field, genre studies embraces a range of approaches to empirical inquiry; more collaboration between researchers with complementary expertise and shared interests has great potential for innovation in knowledge building. With much more to learn about how genre-specific writing skills are developed, future work with diverse learners in diverse contexts drawing on diverse research paradigms can benefit researchers, teachers, and, ultimately, writers.

# Acknowledgments

I wish to thank the editors and two anonymous reviewers for their very helpful comments on an earlier version of this paper. I am also grateful to Tony Silva and John Swales for feedback on work leading to this paper.

# References

Angelova, M., & Riazantseva, A. (1999). ‘‘If you don’t tell me, how can I know?’’ A case study of four international students learning to write the U.S. way. Written Communication, 16, 491–525.   
Bawarshi, A. (2003). Genre and the invention of the writer. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.   
Beaufort, A. (1999). Writing in the real world: Making the transition from school to work. New York: Teachers College Press.   
Beaufort, A. (2000). Operationalizing the concept of discourse community: A case study of one institutional site of composing. Research in the Teaching of English, 31, 486–529.   
Beaufort, A. (2004). Developmental gains of a history major: A case for building a theory of disciplinary writing expertise. Research in the Teaching of English, 39, 136–185.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship model to advanced academic literacy: Graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–34.   
Benesch, S. (1995). Genres and processes in a sociocultural context. Journal of Second Language Writing, 4, 191–195.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: Theory, politics, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Berkenkotter, C., Huckin, T. N., & Ackerman, J. (1988). Conventions, conversations, and certainty: Case study of a student in a rhetoric Ph.D. program. Research in the Teaching of English, 22, 9–44.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. London: Continnum.   
Blakeslee, A. (1997). Activity, context, interaction, and authority: Learning to write scientific papers in situ. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 11, 125–169.   
Canagarajah, A. S. (2002). Geopolitics of academic writing. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Carter, M., Ferzli, M., & Wiebe, E. (2004). Teaching genre to English first-language adults: A study of the laboratory report. Research in the Teaching of English, 38, 395–419.   
Casanave, C. P. (1995). Local interactions: Constructing contexts for composing in a graduate sociology program. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 83–110). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation.   
Casanave, C. P. (2002). Writing games: Multicultural case studies of academic literacy practices in higher education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Chapman, M. L. (1994). The emergence of genres: Some findings from an examination of first-grade writing. Written Communication, 11, 348–380.   
Charney, D. H., & Carlson, R. A. (1995). Learning to write in a genre: What student writers take from model texts. Research in the Teaching of English, 29, 88–125.   
Connor, U., & Mayberry, S. (1996). Learning discipline-specific academic writing: A case study of a Finnish graduate student in the United States. In E. Ventola & A. Mauranen (Eds.), Academic writing: Intercultural and textual issues (pp. 231–253). Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Cope, B., & Kalantzis, M. (Eds.). (1993). The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing. Pittsburgh: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
Cumming, A. (1995). Fostering writing expertise in ESL composition instruction: Modeling and evaluation. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 375–397). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Currie, P. (1993). Entering a disciplinary community: Conceptual activities required to write for one introductory course. Journal of Second Language Writing, 2, 101–117.   
Devitt, A. J. (2004). Writing genres. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Dias, P., Freedman, A., Medway, P., & Pare´, A. (1999). Worlds apart: Acting and writing in academic and workplace contexts. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Doheny-Farina, S. (1989). A case study of one adult writing in academic and non-academic discourse. In C. B. Matalene (Ed.), Worlds of writing: Teaching and learning in discourse communities of work (pp. 17–42). New York: Random House. dissertation writing in science. Research in the Teaching of English, 30, 428–457.   
Dong, Y. R. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Self-reports by students and their advisors from two U.S. institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 269–390.   
Fahnestock, J. (1993). Genre and rhetorical craft. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 265–271.   
Faigley, L., & Hansen, K. (1985). Learning to write in the social sciences. College Composition and Communication, 18, 140–149.   
Fishman, S. M., & McCarthy, L. (2001). An ESL writer and her discipline-based professor. Written Communication, 18, 180–228.   
Flowerdew, J. (2000). Discourse community, legitimate peripheral participation, and the nonnative-English-speaking scholar. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 127–150.   
Flowerdew, J. (Ed.). (2002). Academic discourse. New York: Longman.   
Francis, H., & Hallam, S. (2000). Genre effects on higher education students’ text reading for understanding. Higher Education, 39, 279–296.   
Freedman, A. (1987). Learning to write again. Carleton Papers in Applied Language Studies, 4, 95–116.   
Freedman, A. (1993a). Show and tell? The role of explicit teaching in the learning of new genres. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 222–251.   
Freedman, A. (1993b). Situating genre: A rejoinder. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 272–281.   
Freedman, A., & Adam, C. (1996). Learning to write professionally: ‘‘Situated learning’’ and the transition from university to professional discourse. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 10, 395–427.   
Freedman, A., Adam, C., & Smart, G. (1994). Wearing suits to class: Simulating genres and simulations as genre. Written Communication, 11, 193–226.   
Geisler, C. (1994). Academic literacy and the nature of expertise: Reading, writing, and knowing in academic philosophy. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Gentil, G. (2005). Commitments to academic biliteracy: Case studies of francophone university writers. Written Communication, 22, 421–471.   
Giltrow, J., & Valiquette, M. (1994). Genres and knowledge: Students writing in the disciplines. In A. Freedman & P. Medway (Eds.), Learning and teaching genre (pp. 47–62). Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook Publishers.   
Gosden, H. (1996). Verbal reports of Japanese novices’ research writing practices in English. Journal of Second Language Writing, 5, 109–128.   
Gosden, H. (1998). An aspect of holistic modeling in academic writing: Propositional clusters as a heuristic for thematic control. Journal of Second Language Writing, 7, 19–41.   
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. New York: Longman.   
Haas, C. (1994). Learning to read biology: One student’s rhetorical development in college. Written Communication, 11, 43–84.   
Hammond, J., & Macken-Horarik, M. (1999). Critical literacy: Challenges and questions for ESL classrooms. TESOL Quarterly, 33, 528–544.   
Hanauer, D. (1998). The effect of three literary educational methods on the development of genre knowledge. Journal of Literary Semantics, 27, 43–57.   
Hansen, J. (2000). Interactional conflicts among audience, purpose, and content knowledge in the acquisition of academic literacy in an EAP course. Written Communication, 17, 27–52.   
Harklau, L., Losey, K. M., & Siegal, M. (1999). Generation 1.5 meets college composition: Issues in the teaching of writing to U.S.-educated learners of ESL. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (1998). An evaluation of a genre-based approach to the teaching of EAP/ESP writing. TESOL Quarterly, 32, 147–156.   
Herrington, A. (1985). Writing in academic settings: A study of the contexts for writing in two college chemical engineering courses. Research in the Teaching of English, 19, 331–361.   
Herrington, A., & Moran, C. (2005). Genre across the curriculum. Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.   
Hicks, D. (1990). Genre skills and narrative development in the elementary school years. Linguistics and Education: An International Research Journal, 2, 43–73.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. London: Longman.   
Hyland, K. (2003). Genre-based pedagogies: A social response to process. Journal of Second Language Writing, 12, 17– 29.   
Hyon, S. (1996). Genre in three traditions: Implications for ESL. TESOL Quarterly, 30, 693–722.   
Hyon, S. (2001). Long-term effects of genre-based instruction: A follow-up study of an EAP reading course. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 417–438.   
Hyon, S. (2002). Genre and reading: A classroom study. In A. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives (pp. 121–139). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Ivanicˇ, R. (1998). Writing and identity: The discoursal construction of identity in academic writing. Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Johns, A. M. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Johns, A. M. (2002). Genre in the classroom: Multiple perspectives. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates: Mahwah, NJ.   
Johns, A. M., & Swales, J. M. (2002). Literacy and disciplinary practices: Opening and closing perspectives. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 13–28.   
Johnstone, K. M., Ashbaugh, H., & Warfield, T. D. (2002). Effects of repeated practice and contextual-writing experiences on college students’ writing skills. Journal of Educational Psychology, 94, 305–315.   
Kamberelis, G. (1999). Genre development and learning: Children writing stories, science reports, and poems. Research in the Teaching of English, 33, 403–460.   
Kamberelis, G., & Bovino, T. D. (1999). Cultural artifacts as scaffolds for genre development. Reading Research Quarterly, 34, 138–170.   
Kaplan, R. B. (2001). The dominance of English as a language of science: Effects on other languages and language communities. In U. Ammon (Ed.), The dominance of English as a language of science: Effects on other languages and language communities (pp. 3–26). New York: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Krashen, S. D. (1985). The input hypothesis: Issues and implications. New York: Longman.   
Leki, I. (1995). Coping strategies of ESL students in writing tasks across the curriculum. TESOL Quarterly, 29, 235–260.   
Leki, I. (2003). Living through college literacy: Nursing in a second language. Written Communication, 20, 81–98.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997). ‘‘Completely different worlds’’: EAP and the writing experiences of ESL students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 39–69.   
Luke, A. (1996). Genres of power? Literacy education and the production of capital. In R. Hasan & G. Williams (Eds.), Literacy in society (pp. 308–338). New York: Longman.   
MacKinnon, J. (1993). Becoming a rhetor: Developing writing ability in a mature, writing-intensive organization. In R. Spilka (Ed.), Writing in the workplace: New research perspectives (pp. 41–55). Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press.   
Martin, J. R., & Rothery, J. (1993). Grammar: Making meaning in writing. In B. Cope & M. Kalantzis (Eds.), The powers of literacy: A genre approach to teaching writing (pp. 137–153). Pittsburgh, PA: University of Pittsburgh Press.   
McCarthy, L. P. (1987). A stranger in strange lands: A college student writing across the curriculum. Research in the Teaching of English, 21, 233–265.   
Myhill, D. (2005). Prior knowledge and the (re)production of school written genres. In T. Kostouli (Ed.), Writing in context(s): Textual practices and learning processes in sociocultural settings (pp. 117–136). New York: Springer.   
Myles, J., & Cheng, L. (2003). The social and cultural life of non-native English speaking international graduate students at a Canadian university. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2, 247–263.   
Palmquist, M. (2005). Writing in emerging genres: Student web sites in writing and writing-intensive classes. In A. Herrington & C. Moran (Eds.), Genre across the curriculum (pp. 219–244). Logan, UT: Utah State University Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2001). Genre and the language learning classroom. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Pang, T. T. T. (2002). Textual analysis and contextual awareness building: A comparison of two approaches to teaching genre. In A. M. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom (pp. 145–161). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Pare´, A. (2000). Writing as a way into social work: Genre sets, genre systems, and distributed cognition. In P. Dias & A. .Pare´ (Eds.), Transitions: Writing in academic and workplace settings (pp. 145–166). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press Ltd   
Parks, S. (2000a). Professional writing and the role of incidental collaboration: Evidence from a medical setting. Journal of Second Language Writing, 9, 101–122.   
Parks, S. (2000b). Same task, different activities: Issues of investment, identity, and use of strategy. TESL Canada Journal, 17(2), 64–88.   
Parks, S. (2001). Moving from school to the workplace: Disciplinary innovation, border crossings, and the reshaping of a written genre. Applied Linguistics, 22, 405–438.   
Pennycook, A. (1997). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 253–269.   
Prior, P. A. (1991). Contextualizing writing and response in a graduate seminar. Written Communication, 8, 483–533.   
Prior, P. A. (1998). Writing/disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Reppen, R. (1995). A genre-based approach to content writing instruction. TESOL Journal, 4(2), 32–35.   
Riazi, A. (1997). Acquiring disciplinary literacy: A social–cognitive analysis of text production and learning among Iranian graduate students of education. Journal of Second Language Writing, 6, 105–137.   
Samraj, B. (2000). Discursive practices in graduate-level content courses: The case of environmental science. Text, 20, 347–371.   
Schneider, M., & Fujishima, N. K. (1995). When practice doesn’t make perfect: The case of a graduate ESL student. In D. Belcher & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 3–22). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Company.   
Sengupta, S. (1999). Rhetorical consciousness raising in the L2 reading classroom. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8, 291–319.   
Shaw, P. (1991). Science research students’ composing processes. English for Specific Purposes, 10, 189–206.   
Shine, S., & Roser, N. L. (1999). The role of genre in preschoolers’ response to picture books. Research in the Teaching of English, 34, 197–254.   
Silva, T. (1993). Toward an understanding of the distinct nature of L2 writing: The ESL research and its implications. TESOL Quarterly, 27, 657–675.   
Smart, G. (2000). Reinventing expertise: Experienced writers in the workplace encounter a new genre. In P. Dias & A. Pare´ (Eds.), Transitions: Writing in academic and workplace settings (pp. 223–252). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton.   
Spack, R. (1988). Initiating ESL students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go? TESOL Quarterly, 22(1), 29–51.   
Spack, R. (1997). The acquisition of academic literacy in a second language: A longitudinal case study. Written Communication, 14, 3–62.   
Sung, C.-I. (2000). Investigating rounded academic success: The influence of English language proficiency, academic performance, and socio-academic interaction for Taiwanese doctoral students in the United States. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Michigan.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Tardy, C. M. (2005). ‘‘It’s like a story’’: Rhetorical knowledge development in advanced academic literacy. Journal of English for Academic Purposes 4(4).   
Williams, J. M., & Colomb, G. G. (1993). The case for explicit teaching: Why what you don’t know won’t help you. Research in the Teaching of English, 27, 252–264.   
Winsor, D. A. (1996). Writing like an engineer: A rhetorical education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Winsor, D. (2001). Learning to do knowledge work in systems of distributed cognition. Journal of Business and Technical Communication, 15, 5–28.