# Corpus tools as an affordance to learning in professional legal education

Christoph A. Hafnera,-, Christopher N. Candlin

a Department of English and Communication, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR b Department of Linguistics, Macquarie University, Sydney, Australia

# Abstract

Considerable research has now been undertaken into the development of different approaches to exploiting language corpora for pedagogic purposes in the context of ESP. The question of how language corpora might be utilized by students beyond the immediate language-teaching context is, however, one as yet seldom addressed in the literature. This study attempts to explore the relationship between student use of online corpus tools and academic and professional discourse practices in the context of a professional legal training course at The City University of Hong Kong. Students enrolled in this course were given instruction in how to consult an online concordancer as language support when completing their legal writing assignments. Drawing on narratives of student experience, and other informant data including detailed logs of searches and the outcomes of assessments of English language proficiency, the paper discusses the ways in which students make strategic use of the corpus tools provided to develop competence in writing for legal purposes. The paper concludes by appraising the potential of corpus-based methods as an affordance for studying the practice of Law, in particular as a means of enhancing the acquisition of professional expertise by novice lawyers.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Corpus linguistics; Teaching and language corpora; Data-driven learning; English for specific purposes; English for law; Professional discourse

# 1. Introduction

The flexibility of corpus resources and tools encourages diversity in corpus-based approaches to teaching languages for specific purposes. As an example, at one level, corpus investigation may inform course designers of the particular lexico-grammatical features of the target discourse and genre structures relevant to the curriculum (Flowerdew, 1993). Similarly, a corpus may act as a source of examples of authentic language in use, which can be exploited in class by teachers (Cobb, 1997; Johns, 1991; Stevens, 1991; Thurstun & Candlin, 1998). At another level, students may be actively involved in the use of computerized corpus tools to explore text in order to complete a particular pedagogical task, such as a discourse analytical study of relevant journal articles (Swales & Lee, 2006), or a project involving the serendipitous discovery of language forms in context (Bernardini, 2000). Further examples involving active corpus use by students include making use of the corpus as a feedback tool for students, frequently mediated by a teacher’s comments (Gaskell & Cobb, 2004; Milton, 2006).

Much of the literature on active student use of corpora (e.g., Bernardini, 2000; Chambers, 2005; Chambers & O’Sullivan, 2004; Gaskell & Cobb, 2004; Swales & Lee, 2006) describes activity that has been mandated by the teacher in order to complete a project or homework assignment of some kind (for example a proofreading, or discourse analysis project). In these studies there is a clear concern to establish authenticity of task, in the sense that students interact with the corpus tools and resources to make meaningful discoveries. Such authenticity of task may be promoted in one or more of the following ways. Students may be involved in the construction and analysis of their own corpora (Gavioli, 2005, p. 84; Pearson, 2000; Seidlhofer, 2000), the formulation of their own research directions and communicating their discoveries with their peers (Bernardini, 2000; Chambers, 2005; Swales & Lee, 2006). Alternatively, students may be trained to use corpus tools as a reference resource to discover appropriate language patterns in context, assisted by feedback from their teacher (Chambers & O’Sullivan, 2004; Gaskell & Cobb, 2004; Milton, 2006). The advantage of the latter approach is that it can more easily be integrated directly into the disciplinary activity of the students, for example writing term papers or other such academic tasks. It should however be noted that in practice, students are often withdrawn from their academic environment and focused by a series of guided data-driven learning tasks in the manner described above.

An assumption that appears to underpin much of the work in the area of corpus consultation is that students will go on to use corpus-based resources once they have understood and benefited from the process. As yet we know rather little about how students approach independent corpus consultation, however. Partly, this is due to a reliance on indirect observation methodologies, including self report and the analysis of tasks related to the corpus consultation, for example presentations or proofreadings (e.g., Bernardini, 2000; Chambers & O’Sullivan, 2004; Swales & Lee, 2006; Yoon & Hirvela, 2004). In general, there is a lack of direct evidence of students’ self-directed use of corpus tools. A notable exception to this is the study by Gaskell and Cobb (2004), where the researchers maintain a log of IP addresses and the searches made by students. In that study, students were provided with feedback on their errors in homework assignments, in the form of pre-cast concordancing links. It was found that after feedback was halted, 7 out of 20 of the students continued to use the concordancer to search for language patterns in context.

As a means of furthering the body of research into corpus consultation by learners, this paper aims to explore the extent to which corpus tools can act as an affordance to student learning in the context of providing online language support for legal professional education, conducted through the medium of English. Van Lier (2000, p. 252), in the context of explorations in sociocultural theory and its relationship to second language learning (Lantolf, 2000), describes the construct of affordance in the following terms:

The word affordance was coined by the psychologist James Gibson to refer to a reciprocal relationship between an organism and a particular feature of its environment (1979). An affordance is a particular property of the environment that is relevant-for good or ill-to an active, perceiving organism in that environment. An affordance affords further action (but does not cause or trigger it). What becomes an affordance depends on what the organism does, what it wants, and what is useful for it. In the forest a leaf can offer very different affordances to different organisms. It can offer crawling on for a tree frog, cutting for an ant, food for a caterpillar, shade for a spider, medicine for a shaman, and so on. In all cases, the leaf is the same: its properties do not change; it is just that different properties are perceived and acted upon by different organisms. Parallels to language can easily be drawn. If the language learner is active and engaged, she will perceive linguistic affordances and use them for linguistic action. (Emphasis added)

Thus an affordance provides language learners with opportunities for meaningful action and interaction in a given linguistic environment. The kinds of meaningful actions that are possible depend on the characteristics of the language learners and how the learners perceive and relate to their immediate learning environment, including the tasks and tools with which they are engaged.

In the particular case of corpus investigation for specific purposes language learning, the construct of affordance is especially useful. The construct is used here to explain how advanced students of law appropriate corpus tools and resources to resolve potential problems in meaning making in their legal context. This paper argues that the affordances provided by corpus tools and resources are strongly influenced by the identity and disciplinary culture of the students, and their membership of that culture.

In this connection, the paper argues that at a time when professional discourse practices (in particular workplace practices) are increasingly mediated by computerized resources, it is necessary to ask:

- how intuitively accessible are concordancing technology, output and methodology in the context of professional practice?   
- how effectively do concordancing procedures introduced in academic settings dovetail with professional discourse community practices, so that the procedures fostered may extend beyond the academy, as a form of lifelong learning?

The paper reports on student use of a simple online concordancer and collocation tool as an affordance in completing a variety of professional legal writing tasks, for example in drafting legal opinions or court pleadings. The students concerned were enrolled in a legal writing and drafting course within the City University of Hong Kong Post-graduate Certificate of Laws (PCLL) programme (Bar examination equivalent). The study focuses on observable patterns of concordancer use, attitudes to corpus tools, and perceptions of data-driven learning tasks among students. As we shall see, the corpus consultation reported on here was an integrated and self-directed part of the students’ legal writing process, unconstrained by the imposition of specific data-driven learning tasks by the teacher. All students participating in the course (2 cohorts of approx. 150 students each) were advised to make use of the corpus tools and resources to check their legal writing before submitting assignments. In order to understand how different students were using the concordancer, the following kinds of data were collected: background information data (156 responses), logs of all student searches, structured interviews with 9 students (both individual and focus group), as well as samples of legal writing (9 students), and learning journals (4 students). This paper first outlines the background and context to the study, including what kinds of corpus tools were used and in what ways. Next, sources of data and methods are described, then findings are presented and discussed. Suggestions for future research directions are offered in light of this discussion.

# 2. Background and context

The particular teaching context in focus is that of The City University of Hong Kong PCLL legal writing and drafting course. This is a skills development course, organized by the School of Law, and taught by qualified lawyers. The course uses a mixture of lectures, tutorials and individual consultations, the latter employing a case-based mode. Through their lectures, students are given direct instruction on how to write a wide variety of professional legal genres, including letter of advice, statement of claim, defence and counterclaim, affidavit or affirmation, opinion, and agreement. Students practise these writing tasks for their tutorials, by referring to invented case files and fact situations in which they play the role of a junior barrister or solicitor, writing a particular professional legal document. They then discuss their work with their peers and tutors in tutorials, and receive a mixture of formal and informal feedback from their tutors in tutorials and consultations.

This paper evaluates one aspect of a joint project between the English Language Centre (ELC) and the School of Law at the City University of Hong Kong. As part of the English language support for the legal writing and drafting course, a suite of online resources called Legal Analysis and Writing Skills (LAWS) was developed to assist students with their legal writing. The LAWS web site incorporates a set of interactive online tutorials targeting the various genres encountered by students, together with an online concordancer and collocation tool. In addition, students can download an add-on for Microsoft Word, allowing them to access writing help and query the LAWS concordancer directly from their own word processor (a similar procedure, using a local [i.e., offline] concordancer called WordPilot, is described by Milton, 1999). By completing the online tutorials students are able to gain an overview of each of the genres that they attempt to write, both in terms of their rhetorical form and the typical writing processes involved in their construction. By referring to the online concordancer students are able to gain a better understanding of how particular problematic legal constructions are used in their characteristic legal context. Finally, by downloading and installing the Word add-on, students are able to set up and access an enhanced writing environment on their own personal computers. In essence, the LAWS resources provide students with focused language support that they can refer to when writing assignments for their PCLL courses, in particular the legal writing and drafting course.

# 2.1. The corpus and corpus tools

In implementing the corpus tools in this context a variety of factors are relevant, including corpus design and methodology, support and task design for data-driven learning. With regard to corpus design, a strong case has been made in the relevant literature (e.g., Flowerdew, 1993; Henry & Roseberry, 2001) for the use of specialized corpora in ESP settings (typically using much smaller corpora than those compiled for general reference purposes, such as the BNC). As Tribble (1997) observes, ‘‘if one wishes to investigate the lexis of a particular content domain (e.g., health) a specialist micro-corpus can often be much more useful than a much larger general corpus.’’ Similarly Flowerdew (2004, p. 15) suggests that specialized corpora constructed for a particular purpose are better suited to understanding characteristic lexical and grammatical features of academic or professional discourse than general reference corpora. This is in spite of the fact that such focused corpora of necessity provide a less balanced and representative view of the English language as a whole.

In this project, the corpus constructed consisted of 114 legal cases (797,000 words) from three different subject areas and comprised a total of seven sub-corpora. In order to ensure that the corpus be relevant to students, Law School staff were asked to suggest cases for inclusion, based on the courses that they were teaching. Legal cases were chosen for the corpus partly because of their easy accessibility, compared to some other legal professional genres. Also, it was thought that students in their fourth year of legal study would be very familiar with this genre and so should be able to infer many of the pragmatic aspects of language which are normally lost in a corpus of written text. Furthermore, in terms of generic structure, grammatical and lexical patterning, judgments bear considerable resemblance to letters of advice and legal opinions, two of the genres that students would be writing for their legal writing and drafting course. As a form of legal argumentation, cases may also include useful samples of language for some language functions in other legal professional genres, for example making submissions in pleadings. Nonetheless, it is important to note that there will always be subtle differences between different legal genres because of the complex intertextuality and interdiscursivity that is characteristic of legal discourse (Bhatia, Langton, & Lung, 2004). Students searching corpus output to understand usage of lexical phrases in their characteristic legal professional contexts would have to be aware of these issues.

The online corpus and collocation tools used were constructed specifically for the LAWS project. An attempt was made to provide technical tools that afford various opportunities for learning by access to the concordancer. For example, students can access the concordancer from a variety of locations, including a menu item in their own word processors, any page of the online tutorials, and, of course, from the concordancer search page. This flexibility is intended to facilitate queries to the concordancer and thereby enhance the value of the technology as an affordance to discovery learning. In addition, in order to supplement searches, a number of online dictionaries are linked to the concordancer, including language learner dictionaries and a specialist legal dictionary. An automatically updating list of ‘top-ten users’ searches’ is displayed on the LAWS homepage as a means of facilitating the sharing of queries between students. Students can also refer to a list of glossaries of legal terms, which summarize technical lexis specific to the fields covered by the sub-corpora provided.

# 2.2. Approach taken

The corpus tools and resources were designed to integrate into the pattern of students’ disciplinary writing and associated specific purposes language learning. Corpus-based approaches have sometimes been criticized on the grounds that discoveries from corpora may be of little assistance if students are not engaged in putting such discoveries to purposeful use in authentic communicative tasks (Aston, 1995; Widdowson, 2000). In the present context, it was felt that the corpus tools would best serve students as reference tools in the ordinary course of their legal writing and drafting. Such an integrated approach is summarized by Aston (1995, p. 267), as follows:

Faced with a particular problem, the learner could turn to the corpus for evidence that a particular form could have a particular meaning in a particular context, the similarity of the corpus texts to that involved in the task making it relatively likely that models and analogies would be found.

The aim of taking such an approach was to integrate the concordancing task as fully as possible with authentic writing tasks with which learners were engaged in the course of their legal studies. The concordancer provides students with an affordance to learning how to construct legal discourse in the context of the authentic legal writing and drafting tasks provided on the PCLL courses. The task, as presented to students, was to (optionally) utilize this tool when they encountered difficulties in their legal writing and drafting.

In terms of method, the concordancing task is basically an unfamiliar one for students and so some training in search strategies has proved to be desirable (Gavioli, 1997; Kennedy & Miceli, 2001). Such support can be provided through the online tools themselves, in the form of help files, animated demonstrations, and short tasks, or through scheduled face-to-face tutorials that cover the essential items. In order to familiarize students with the concordancing procedure, a number of task-based exercises were created in a concordancing help section on the LAWS web site. In the first year of implementation, the first author gave students a brief introduction to the LAWS suite of tools, which consisted of a short demonstration during lecture time. In the second year this was expanded to a one-hour hands-on tutorial.

# 3. Data sources and methods

Concurrently with the introduction and piloting of the online resources, a programme of large-scale data collection was begun in order to provide a basis of evidence for the evaluation of those resources. This programme lasted almost one and a half years, from September 2005 to January 2007. As the PCLL is a 1-year course, with legal writing and drafting as a course in the first semester, data from two different cohorts of legal writing and drafting students were collected. Both large- and small-scale data collection methods were used, as described in the following sections.

# 3.1. Large-scale data collection

All users were electronically tracked when using the LAWS web site and a log of their activity on the site was kept. Users had their own individual account, and each was required to log on at the beginning of each session. As a result, it was possible to distinguish among individual user accounts (and therefore presumably users), if desired. With regard to the concordancing tools, the following data were collected:

User account name.   
Date and time accessed.   
Referring page.   
Search query.   
Corpus or sub-corpus searched.

The ability to associate such data reliably, in particular to link individual users with their individual queries, is a feature which is often missing from studies of concordancer use (but compare Gaskell & Cobb, 2004). In addition to the data mentioned above, a small amount of student background information was collected using a short questionnaire. The questionnaire, based on one designed by Payne, Lee, and Sharma (2005), asked students to report their IELTS score and self-assess their proficiency in English language, computer skills and web-searching ability. In year one, the questionnaire was administered manually, but in year two it was administered electronically as part of the registration process for the web site. Table 1 summarizes the self-reported proficiency ratings for the two cohorts.

Little difference was observed between the two cohorts, though the second cohort recorded slightly lower mean IELTS scores and self-reported ratings of English proficiency. Note that this comparison should be treated with some caution as the data were collected using slightly different methods – one using a paper-based questionnaire, the other an electronic questionnaire.

# 3.2. Small-scale data collection

In order to gain deeper insights into student attitudes towards the corpus tools and perceptions of the data-driven learning tasks, two related small-scale studies were carried out. The first of these was a case study involving four full-time PCLL students which took place in the semester when LAWS was introduced. The students participating in the research came from two different legal writing and drafting courses taught by the first author and volunteered to take part. The students were followed over a period of roughly 4 months and the following kinds of data were collected:

- Background information about the students. $\bullet$ Legal writing produced by the students. Learning journals documenting students’ legal writing process.

Table 1 Participants’ mean self-reported proficiency ratings by cohort (large scale)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mean results by cohort</td><td>IELTSa</td><td>English proficiencyb</td><td>Computer proficiencyb</td><td>Search engine proficiencyb</td></tr><tr><td>Cohort 1 (68 responses)</td><td>7.8</td><td>8.0</td><td>6.8</td><td>6.6</td></tr><tr><td>Cohort 2 (88 responses)</td><td>7.3</td><td>7.6</td><td>6.9</td><td>6.7</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Self-reported IELTS score out of 9. b Self-assessment out of 10.

Semi-structured interviews (both individual and group) with students about the legal writing process and resources used. Screen-records of students using concordancing tools in a controlled environment, using convergent and divergent tasks. - Logging data of students using concordancing tools in an uncontrolled environment, for their own purposes and their own chosen tasks.

It should be noted that the data collected were not all of the same type: for example, the screen records collected involved students in a series of artificial concordancing tasks. Accordingly, the research in this paper focuses on those types of data which gave insight into students’ perceptions and use of the corpus tools and resources in the normal course of their work.

The second small-scale study involved 5 full-time students and took place 1 year later. Data collected included background information about the students, interview data from each of the students (semi-structured, 3 individual interviews and one group of 2), examples of legal writing produced by the students, and logging data of their use of the concordancing tools, for their own purposes and on their own chosen tasks. However, in this second study, there was no attempt to monitor students’ progress over the course of the semester. Logging data were reviewed late in the semester and a number of students were identified as potentially interesting participants for interview (based on amount of concordancing activity, both in the training session and independently during the semester). Students were contacted towards the end of the semester and invited to an interview. Again, students volunteered to take part. Only one of the students in this study was in the first author’s legal writing and drafting class. While the initial case study sought to explore the possible role of the LAWS resources in broader patterns of student behaviour, this study focused particularly on student use of the concordancer, as explained by the students themselves.

Of the nine participants in these small-scale studies, five were women and four were men, ranging in age from the low 20s to over 40 years of age. As one would expect, the participants in these small-scale studies were all highly educated, with two thirds of them holding at least two tertiary qualifications. Six of the participants had been overseas for some part of their education, to places like New Zealand, Australia, Canada and the UK. However, all of the participants identified Cantonese as their first language, and typically listed English and Mandarin under ‘other languages spoken’. The majority of the participants (7) had had some kind of law-related work experience, and roughly half of them (5) had had full time work experience in some occupation or other. Such a profile is typical of students in the PCLL programme, including as it does students from quite diverse backgrounds, many of whom are already accomplished professionals in their own field.

In general, participants in the second cohort interviews reported greater confidence with using computers, greater experience of computer use, and a greater range of web-searching strategies (which we might take as an indicator of their familiarity with search engines in general). These students had been selected because their logs of concordancer access were high. It is therefore perhaps not surprising that these students were overall relatively confident in using computers. Table 2 summarizes students’ self-reported proficiency ratings for the two groups:

As evidenced by Table 2, there is a marked difference in how participants from the two small-scale studies rate their abilities with computers and search engines, with the second group on average displaying far more confidence. On average this latter group was also more confident than other members of their cohort. On the other hand, participants in the first cohort case study rated themselves low in computer proficiency and web searching proficiency, even compared to other students from their cohort.

Table 2 Participants’ mean self-reported proficiency ratings by cohort (small scale)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mean results by cohorta</td><td>IELTSb</td><td>English proficiencyc</td><td>Computer proficiencyc</td><td>Search engine proficiencyc</td></tr><tr><td>Cohort 1 (case study)</td><td>7.9 (7.8)</td><td>7.8 (8.0)</td><td>5.8 (6.8)</td><td>6.5 (6.6)</td></tr><tr><td>Cohort 2 (interviews)</td><td>7.6 (7.3)</td><td>7.6 (7.6)</td><td>8.0 (6.9)</td><td>8.4 (6.7)</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Results from the entire cohort (large-scale questionnaire) are in brackets. b Self-reported IELTS score out of 9. c Self-assessment out of 10.

Table 3 Students’ reported computer use habits   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Question</td><td colspan="4">Response</td></tr><tr><td>On average, how often do you use a search engine to</td><td>Once a week</td><td>More than once a week but less</td><td>Once a day</td><td>More than once a day</td></tr><tr><td>search the Internet?</td><td></td><td>than once a day 2</td><td></td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>First cohort (case study)</td><td>0</td><td></td><td>2</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Second cohort (interviews)</td><td>0</td><td>1</td><td>1</td><td>3</td></tr><tr><td>On average during term time,. how often do you search a.</td><td>Once a week</td><td>More than once a week but less than once a day</td><td>Once a day</td><td>More than once a day</td></tr><tr><td>legal database? First cohort (case study)</td><td>2</td><td>2</td><td>0</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Second cohort (interviews)</td><td>2</td><td>3</td><td>0</td><td>0 0</td></tr><tr><td>How do you use search</td><td colspan="2">I use simple searches with a few search</td><td colspan="2">I use advanced functions to combine</td></tr><tr><td>engines (for the internet and.</td><td colspan="2">terms to find information.</td><td colspan="2">words and terms to narrow or widen a search</td></tr><tr><td>legal databases)?</td><td colspan="2">4</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>First cohort (case study) Second cohort (interviews)</td><td colspan="2">2</td><td colspan="2">0 3</td></tr></table></body></html>

Furthermore, when participants were asked about their habitual computer search strategies, participants from the second cohort reported greater frequency of use and, on the face of it, made use of more varied strategies. Table 3 summarizes their answers to the background questionnaire.

Table 3 shows that the two groups report about the same amount of use of searching legal databases. However, the second group tends to search the Internet more often. In addition, three out of the five students in the second group report using advanced functions, combining words and terms when searching for information on the Internet, compared with none from the first group. At a glance it appears that this group has evolved more sophisticated strategies for searching the Internet.

Taken as a whole, the two groups comprise a range of individuals of varying ability and confidence. As such, the perspectives offered by participants afford considerable insight into general issues relating to the use of concordancing tools in this context.

# 4. Findings and discussion

As suggested above, the findings in this paper reflect student use of corpus tools as an optional affordance in completing aspects of their coursework. While giving students the opportunity to make their own decisions about the utilization of corpus tools runs the risk of students opting out, where they do take part it allows us to gain special insight into the way in which they utilize the tools in this context. Through logs of searches, case studies and individual interviews, we are able to build a rich picture of how students approach the corpus tools, and the kinds of affordances that they perceive they provide.

# 4.1. Broad patterns of corpus use

As suggested above, the logs of concordancing use provide a small, yet significant data set. In the first year of the study 22 out of 103 $( 2 1 \% )$ of the students utilizing the LAWS online resources made use of the concordancer without prompting and for their own purposes, and in the second year this proportion rose to 36 out of 91 $( 4 0 \% )$ . The rise in the number of students willing to engage with the corpus tools may reflect an increased awareness of the tools, their purpose and how to use them. This increased awareness may have been fostered by the slightly longer hands-on training session provided to students at the beginning of the second year. On the whole, however, the adoption rate is modest compared to the more familiar online tutorials, which contained targeted, language focused and task-based materials.

The search logs further reveal that there is a tension between the need to access domainspecific knowledge and the need for language specific knowledge. The key words entered by some students suggest a search for full-text documents (rather than specific patterns of language), as in the following queries:

# affirmation, defence and counterclaim, employment agreement

All of these searches identify legal documents or parts of legal documents that students wrote for courses on the PCLL (including legal writing and drafting). It therefore seems possible that students were trying to use the concordancer to retrieve examples of these documents for modelling purposes, as suggested by the following student search:

# sample of settlement agreement

These document-related searches contrast with the kind of language-based queries (e.g., in accordance, in view of, pertain) that one might expect from students working carefully through their legal writing assignments, focused on composition. However, such legal document searches are probably consistent with common legal writing practices, where drafting from legal precedents is the norm. It therefore seems likely that students construct the concordancing task through their identity as apprentice lawyers, and that this influences the affordances that they perceive in the corpus tools.

A summary of search patterns and focus (lexical items or legal documents as described above) is provided in Table 4.

It is clear from the table that as well as an overall increase in corpus tool use in year 2, students in the second cohort tend to use the corpus tools more appropriately as an aid to composition, with fewer legal document searches recorded. This increase could again be attributed to the hands-on training session conducted at the beginning of the semester (year 2). However, the logs demonstrate that students return to their original preferences for modelling-based searches over time. Students in the second cohort focus their searches mostly on composition and language for around 2 months after the hands-on training, before focusing on whole documents again. Thus, when the second cohort is compared with the first cohort, higher use, and more appropriate searches are observed. However, there are also indications that, as time passes, students alter the focus of the use of the resource, from language composition to modelling full documents. This suggests that while better training helps to make the corpus tools accessible, students nevertheless resort to more familiar disciplinary procedures over time.

Table 4 Searches made by focus and year (cohort)a   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Search focus</td><td>Lexical item</td><td>Legal document</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Year 1 (first cohort)</td><td>53 (48%)</td><td>57 (52%)</td><td>110 (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Year 2 (second cohort)</td><td>247 (71%)</td><td>99 (29%)</td><td>346 (100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Note that data has been filtered to remove any searches made during induction sessions.

Table 5 Searches made by referring page   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Search focus</td><td colspan="2">Referring page</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Concordancer (%)</td><td>Othera (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical phrase</td><td>89</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Legal document</td><td>70</td><td>30</td></tr></table></body></html>

a For example, originating from a page in the online tutorials.

A further pattern observable in the logs relates to the web page where the student began their search (the referring page). As noted above, every page of the online tutorials contains a simple search interface, facilitating queries to the corpus from anywhere on the site. An analysis of these referring pages reveals that legal document searches more frequently originate in the online tutorials, as illustrated in Table 5.

As illustrated by Table 5, a much higher proportion of legal document searches originate from other parts of the site than from the concordancer. This may indicate that when students are engaged in the online tutorials, they use the concordancer in an attempt to retrieve more information about the genre they are studying. However, because their keyword searches focus on broad aspects of subject matter, rather than on phraseology, it is unlikely that students are able to benefit from incidental learning opportunities that the concordancer might afford. More focused, targeted searches are required to properly utilize these tools as a learning resource.

In summary, the data from the logs indicate that students sometimes use the corpus tools in an attempt to retrieve full documents, similar to the way in which they might use other search engines on the web, while doing legal research. The case study and interviews conducted allow us to investigate students’ attitude to the corpus tools in greater detail. In the following sections we draw on the interview data in order to understand the kind of affordances that students perceive such corpus tools to provide.

# 4.2. Attitude towards the corpus tools

The students interviewed can be divided into three different groups: adopters, who recognized and acted on a need for the corpus tools (four students); and two different kinds of non-adopters: the first kind of non-adopter expressed a preference for using other, similar web-based tools for the purpose of checking language patterns (two students); the second kind preferred not to use any such tools at all (three students). ‘Adoption’ here is used in a narrow sense: the logs show that the students cannot be said to have formed any long-lasting habits. Rather, the students have adopted the corpus tools to act as language support with one or more of their legal writing assignments (for a discussion of processes of adoption and normalization, see Bax, 2003).

# 4.2.1. Corpus tools as an affordance in legal writing and drafting

Whether they had adopted them for their own use or not, all of the students interviewed displayed an understanding of the intended function of the corpus tools, as a reference resource for composition purposes. Adopters of the corpus tools viewed them as a convenient and helpful toolset to provide language support for their legal writing and drafting assignments. According to one student:

# This is a quick fix tool, so that if there is anything that went wrong I can check with it. [S4]

Viewed this way, the corpus tools provide opportunities for incidental, informal learning, integrated with the authentic communicative writing requirements of the PCLL courses. A question which naturally arises at this point, and one which would merit further attention in future, is how effective the tools were in promoting such learning. If students perceive the tools as providing quick and convenient solutions to their language problems, then it is possible that they will limit themselves to discovery of surface language patterns only, without exploring their discursive function.

Of the students who used the tools, most reported using them to revise their legal writing and drafting assignments, and in order to avoid making ‘stupid mistakes’ [S5]. However one student reported taking more general learning opportunities, using the corpus tools in an attempt to discover the nuances of particular words or phrases:

Sometimes actually I just use it for curiousy just to see whether that word can be used with some other words and in order to improve the meaning of the single word. [S7]

Thus students perceived the tools as affording the correction of possible language problems in their writing, and also exploited opportunities to learn through discovery.

# 4.2.2. The Web as corpus resource

Of the students who did not adopt the corpus tools for their own use, two students reported using language-based search strategies with web-based search engines such as Google or Yahoo (and one of the adopters, above, used this strategy as well). According to one student, during the revision process:

I will go online and just very quickly do a search and see how other trustworthy articles or resources [actual?] writing that piece of sentence or phrases, so that’s what I do when I’m really picky [laughs] [S9]

This student considered online newspapers to be a ‘trustworthy’ source for confirming her language intuitions. When asked why she didn’t use the concordancer in a similar way, she answered that she was more accustomed to using Google. Perhaps for similar reasons, these students had not considered using an online legal database such as Westlaw or Lexis Nexis to facilitate the kind of language queries that they reported making elsewhere on the web. Nevertheless, students perceived advantages in searching the specialized corpus compiled for them, as compared to the web as a whole. One student commented that the specialized corpus provided ‘many examples of a particular phrase that I want to use’ [S5].

However, the wealth of legally relevant data in the corpus, normally regarded as a positive feature in corpus-based ESP work, was perceived by students as problematic. According to one student:

I think one of the problems is there is so many results, and you know every single result is legally related and important, so you have to go through every one. [S8]

Compared to skimming through results gleaned from a Google search, it is initially more difficult to identify relevant examples in concordance output or collocation lists. It is likely that this difficulty arises because students who compare their text with texts from the web do not apply particularly rigorous criteria in deciding how lexical items are used. Rather, students’ web searches consist of finding authoritative, trustworthy sources to provide them with reassurance that expressions they have adopted are ‘safe’ because ‘there is [a] passage that contains that phrase’ [S5]. It appears that when using a specialized corpus, which is already focused in this manner, students may feel rather overwhelmed by the sheer quantity of available and relevant data.

Two points suggest themselves in relation to this finding. The first is that students need considerable additional help in order to make sense of the linguistic data presented in concordance lines or collocation lists. This help should be in the form of methodological help: for example, what questions is it appropriate to ask of the corpus? What factors should be taken into account in interpreting the data? (Kennedy & Miceli, 2001) Such help could also be applied to exploit the tendency of students to browse the web for language patterns, often in an unfocused manner. For students to use existing web search engines to understand the use of language patterns effectively, they need to be able to understand and interpret output from web search engines in terms of its particular discursive functions in context.

The second point which arises, and which is alluded to above, is that a broad approach to data-driven learning can be promoted with students including access to a variety of different web-based search engines. Data-driven learning is not limited to technology designed specifically for linguistic investigation, but should be seen as an exploratory approach relying on student discoveries through a variety of data-based search tools. This is becoming increasingly clear, with the design of, for example, pedagogically modified corpus tools for school students and more varied tools for the academy (Braun, 2005; Milton, 2004, 2006).

# 4.2.3. Corpus tools as overspecialized, language tools

Among the non-adopters there is a general perception that the corpus tools are extremely specialized, and that this specialization is unhelpful. This perception echoes to an extent the concern reported above that it was difficult to identify relevant results in the corpus because all results appeared relevant. Students perceive a variety of problems with the corpus tools in that the tools appear to them to focus mechanically on language, and fail to focus on law. Here, students report two related perceptions. The first is that using the corpus tools involves focusing exclusively, and unnecessarily, on language. The second is that this focus on language is highly technical and constraining, and detrimental to what they perceive as the creative process of legal writing.

Some students apparently felt that there was no need for them to improve aspects of their legal English. This perception persisted in spite of corrective feedback from the tutor:

I’m quite sure how the word is used so I don’t need to check. Although sometimes, it’s wrong, it turn out to be wrong and get corrected. [S6]

Similarly, another student commented that ‘grammar is something that you either know or you don’t know before you come into this course’ [S9]. Such comments suggest that some students view the corpus tools as redundant because the students feel that they have mastered the English language to the best of their ability, and adequately for their purposes.

Secondly, one student commented on the highly technical approach to writing fostered by the corpus tools:

But then I don’t think that we, sort of, approach writing as detailed as [the corpus tools are] designed for us to bey I don’t know. I’m not a surgeon in my writing. [S2]

This student variously describes the method as ‘mechanical,’ ‘writing like a formula’ and ‘very methodological,’ and would appear to have difficulty with the technical linguistic approach evidenced by the corpus tools. Similarly, in revising their legal writing, a number of the students interviewed prefer to rely on their own intuitive feeling for the language, rather than referring to the corpus tools. Partly, this is because they prefer to use methods they are familiar with. On the other hand, the strong attitude demonstrated by this student suggests that she found the data-driven learning approach very foreign.

# 5. Summary and future directions

In summary, in this study we observed that students using corpus tools for their own purposes appeared to search for full legal documents, rather than for patterns of lexical phrases. Students perceived affordances in the corpus tools primarily because they provided a convenient way to check legal writing assignments. Perhaps because of a lack of familiarity with the tools, some students preferred to use the web as a corpus resource to check their own language intuitions. Finally, some students found the tools difficult to utilize because they viewed them as highly specialized language tools, with little application in authentic legal professional contexts. These findings suggest that students who construct themselves as apprentice lawyers bring this identity to the corpus consultation task. It is natural and to be expected that such students will draw on professional practices when perceiving affordances in corpus tools and resources.

A clear tension was observed between the professional discourse practices, encouraging students to focus on cases, precedents and models, and the integrated data-driven learning approach, promoting a focus on language and composition. In view of this observation we now suggest a reformulation of the questions posed at the outset of the paper (see Section 1). We suggest that these may be reformulated as one single question, as follows:

- How can the tension between the varying demands imposed on learners by distinctive academic and professional practices best be exploited, in order to promote the affordances of corpus consultation as a means of lifelong learning?

Both the procedures promoted with students in this study, and the procedures adopted by students, have their own merits. Any academic focus on construction and composition must have the outcome (the legal model) in mind in order to guarantee authenticity of text and task. However, even in professional practice that works with such legal models, continuing lifelong learners still need to be able to focus and reflect on the functional lexical phrases that constitute the essence of the texture of the documents they are composing. Language focused corpus tools are ideally suited to this purpose.

Bearing in mind the central theme of corpus tools as an affordance to learning in the legal professional context, a number of follow-up studies/innovations now suggest themselves. Within the academy, law students could be provided with templates or skeletons of legal documents, containing lists of commonly used lexical phrases and suggestions on how to concordance these in context in order to explore their usage. Such templates could be packaged as part of the case file that students are working on, to better integrate this focus on language with the legal task. At this point it would also be instructive to examine how well law students respond to the idea of using existing legal databases as a corpus resource. A further, more ambitious suggestion is to explore the possibility of incorporating corpus-based, language related feedback on queries in existing legal databases. Such an innovation would allow law students and legal practitioners greater affordances to explore language usage in the course of their normal professional work.

# Acknowledgements

The authors are grateful to The City University of Hong Kong for providing funding for the online resources described in this paper. The authors are also grateful to members of the project team for their valuable assistance, and to colleagues who provided input in the early stages of development, in particular Dr. John Milton at The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology and Mr. Nigel Bruce at The University of Hong Kong.

# References

Aston, G. (1995). Corpora in language pedagogy: Matching theory and practice. In G. Cook, & B. Seidlhofer (Eds.), Principles and practice in applied linguistics (pp. 257–270). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Bax, S. (2003). CALL-past, present and future. System, 31, 13–28.   
Bernardini, S. (2000). Systematising serendipity: Proposals for concordancing large corpora with language learners. In L. Burnard, & T. McEnery (Eds.), Rethinking language pedagogy from a corpus perspective: Papers from the third international conference on teaching and language corpora (pp. 225–234). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.   
Bhatia, V. K., Langton, N., & Lung, J. (2004). Legal discourse: Opportunities and threats for corpus linguistics. In U. Connor, & T. A. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 203–234). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Braun, S. (2005). From pedagogically relevant corpora to authentic language learning contents. ReCALL, 17(1), 47–64.   
Chambers, A. (2005). Integrating corpus consultation in language studies. Language Learning and Technology, 9(2), 111–125.   
Chambers, A., & O’Sullivan, I´ . (2004). Corpus consultation and advanced learners’ writing skills in French. ReCALL, 16(1), 158–172.   
Cobb, T. (1997). Is there any measurable learning from hands-on concordancing? System, 25(3), 301–315.   
Flowerdew, J. (1993). Concordancing as a tool in course design. System, 21(2), 231–244.   
Flowerdew, L. (2004). The argument for using English specialized corpora. In U. Connor, & T. A. Upton (Eds.), Discourse in the professions: Perspectives from corpus linguistics (pp. 11–33). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Gaskell, D., & Cobb, T. (2004). Can learners use concordance feedback for writing errors? System, 32, 301–319.   
Gavioli, L. (1997). Exploring texts through the concordancer. In A. Wichmann, S. Fligelstone, T. Mcenery, & G. Knowles (Eds.), Teaching and language corpora. New York: Addison Wesley Longman.   
Gavioli, L. (2005). Exploring corpora for ESP learning. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Gibson, J. J. (1979). The ecological approach to visual perception. Boston: Houghton Mifflin.   
Henry, A., & Roseberry, R. L. (2001). Using a small corpus to obtain data for teaching a genre. In M. Ghadessy, A. Henry, & R. L. Roseberry (Eds.), Small corpus studies and ELT: Theory and practice (pp. 93–133). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Johns, T. (1991). From printout to handout: Grammar and vocabulary teaching in the context of data-driven learning. In T. Johns, & P. King (Eds.), Classroom concordancing (pp. 27–45). Birmingham: University of Birmingham.   
Kennedy, C., & Miceli, T. (2001). An evaluation of intermediate students’ approaches to corpus investigation. Language Learning and Technology, 5(3), 77–90.   
Lantolf, J. P. (2000). Sociocultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Milton, J. (1999). Lexical thickets and electronic gateways: Making text accessible by novice writers. In C. N. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, processes and practices (pp. 221–243). London: Longman.   
Milton, J. (2004). From parrots to puppet masters: Fostering creative and authentic language use with online tools. In B. Holmberg, M. Shelley, & C. White (Eds.), Distance education and languages: Evolution and change (pp. 242–257). Clevedon: Multilingual Matters.   
Milton, J. (2006). Resource-rich web-based feedback: Helping learners become independent writers. In K. Hyland, & F. Hyland (Eds.), Feedback in second language writing: Contexts and issues (pp. 123–139). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Payne, J. S., Lee, J. J., & Sharma, S. (2005). An HCI study of data-driven learning. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Computer Assisted Language Instruction Consortium (CALICO), Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI.   
Pearson, J. (2000). Surfing the Internet: Teaching students to choose their texts wisely. In L. Burnard, & T. McEnery (Eds.), Rethinking language pedagogy from a corpus perspective: Papers from the third international conference on teaching and language corpora (pp. 235–239). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.   
Seidlhofer, B. (2000). Operationalising intertextuality: Using learner corpora for learning. In L. Burnard, & T. McEnery (Eds.), Rethinking language pedagogy from a corpus perspective: Papers from the third international conference on teaching and language corpora (pp. 207–223). Frankfurt am Main: Peter Lang.   
Stevens, V. (1991). Concordance-based vocabulary exercises: A viable alternative to gap-fillers. In T. Johns, & P. King (Eds.), Classroom concordancing (pp. 47–63). Birmingham: University of Birmingham.   
Swales, J. M., & Lee, D. Y. W. (2006). A corpus-based EAP course for NNS doctoral students: Moving from available specialized corpora to self-compiled corpora. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 56–75.   
Thurstun, J., & Candlin, C. (1998). Concordancing and the teaching of the vocabulary of academic English. English for Specific Purposes, 17(3), 267–280.   
Tribble, C. (1997). Improvising corpora for ELT: Quick and dirty ways of developing corpora for language teaching. Paper presented at the first international conference: Practical applications in language corpora, University of Lodz, Poland.   
Van Lier, L. (2000). From input to affordance: Socio-interactive learning from an ecological perspective. In J. P. Lantolf (Ed.), Sociocultural theory and second language learning (pp. 245–259). Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Widdowson, H. (2000). On the limitations of linguistics applied. Applied Linguistics, 21(1), 3–25.   
Yoon, H., & Hirvela, A. (2004). ESL student attitudes towards corpus use in L2 writing. Journal of Second Language Writing, 13, 257–283.

Christoph Hafner is a Lecturer in The Department of English and Communication, City University of Hong Kong and is also currently pursuing Ph.D. studies in the Department of Linguistics at Macquarie University, Sydney. He is legally trained and has been involved in a variety of research projects in the area of legal academic and professional communication, including the development of online resources for legal writing and drafting.

Christopher Candlin is a Senior Research Professor in the Department of Linguistics at Macquarie University, Sydney. His current research is in the analysis of professional/institutional discourse, particularly in the domains of healthcare, law and social work, and in the application of such analysis to programmes of professional development and training.