# Rhetorics and communication media across cultures

Barry Thatcher

New Mexico State University, P.O. Box 30001, Las Cruces, NM 88003 8001, USA

# Abstract

Recent developments in contrastive rhetoric have looked at a variety of cultural, linguistic, historical, and social factors that influence the complex acts of acquiring and demonstrating second language (L2) writing competencies. These developments, however, focus almost exclusively on writing. The present paper suggests that other communication media—such as orality, email, and hypertext—can similarly influence cultural and rhetorical patterns. Just as each rhetorical tradition has a distinct relationship to communication media, the use of each communication medium in a particular rhetorical tradition can also influence the textual and organizational patterns of writers from that rhetorical tradition. This paper first overviews the debate about media–culture relationships, and then explores how orality, writing, email, and hypertext relate to three major intercultural values: individual–collective, universal– particular, and high and low context. This section draws on intercultural and cross-cultural studies, showing that contrastive rhetoric and EAP scholars could benefit from understanding L2 literacies from a cross-cultural perspective.

$©$ 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: EAP; Orality; Literacy; Remediation; Email; Hypertext; Intercultural values

# 1. Introduction

Traditionally, contrastive rhetoric has focused on the relations of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and L2 textual patterns to the rhetorical and cultural traditions of authors and audiences (see Kaplan, 1966). This focus is based on the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis that one’s native language determines (strong hypothesis) or encourages (weak hypothesis) one’s thought, and therefore, writing patterns. As first argued by Kaplan (1966), many L2 students of English composition bring their textual organizing strategies from their L1 into their English compositions. As explored thoroughly in a number of essays in this issue (see, for example, Connor this volume), contrastive rhetoric has moved beyond the simple one-to-one correspondences between writing patterns and culture. These recent developments look at a variety of cultural, linguistic, historical, and social factors that influence the complex acts of acquiring and demonstrating EAP/L2 writing competencies (see Connor, 1996). Other studies have demonstrated that L2 writing scholars and teachers need to consider not only the cultural background of their students, but also the specific context and audience–author relations to understand fully the textual patterns of the L2 writer (Thatcher, 1999, 2000).

While these developments are important, in this paper I intend to push contrastive rhetoric and the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis even further by suggesting that the focus on the verbal medium as evidence for—and a reinforcer of—cultural and rhetorical patterns is too narrow and debilitating. In addition to language, a growing number of researchers (e.g. Bolter & Grusin, 1999; Kaufer & Carley, 1993) argue that communication media such as orality, writing, email, and hypertext can similarly determine (strong hypothesis) or predispose (weak hypothesis) our mental and corresponding rhetorical patterns. Like languages, communication media are not neutral devices that correspond equally and favorably to all rhetorical and cultural traditions. Rather, communication media restrain and reinforce certain communication possibilities and corresponding rhetorical and cultural patterns, thus developing complexly different relations to each cultural/rhetorical tradition. Consequently, each rhetorical tradition develops with each communication media a distinct sense of purpose, audience–author relations, information needs, organizational patterns, and stylistic preferences. Therefore, contrastive rhetoric researchers and EAP/L2 writing instructors need to understand how writing is situated with other communication media and cultures across the globe.

For example, at two multinational organizations in Ecuador, South American writers were more adept than US writers at using orality to mediate organizational relationships because of their collective and particular value orientations and civil law legal traditions (Thatcher, 2000). US writers, however, were much more accustomed to using writing to mediate organizational relationships because of their individualistic and universalist orientations and common law legal traditions. Writing and orality fulfilled different purposes, prompted by different circumstances, and produced different results. Scollon and Scollon (2001) make a similar argument, stating that EAP/L2 literacy needs to address orality, pictures, and other texts that are part of the cultural and rhetorical environment.

This complex relation of cultures to communication media is not the only factor influencing EAP/L2 writing patterns. Just as each rhetorical tradition has a distinct relationship to communication media, the use of each communication medium in a particular rhetorical tradition can influence the textual organizational patterns of writers from that tradition. Researchers (e.g. Bolter & Grusin, 1999) argue that email and hypertext continue to influence the rhetorical patterns and assumptions of writing and print communication. As compared to writing, hypertext communication, such as Internet websites, incorporates more visual (and even audio) features and uses a less linear, more multi time-framed format—hence the ‘‘web’’ metaphor (Kress, 1998). As Bolter and Grusin (1999) argue, these visual and nonlinear organizational elements of hypertext are showing up in hardcopy (i.e. written documents) in the US. Consequently, hypertext is not transplanting writing, but changing its forms and purposes, or ‘‘remediating’’ it. ‘‘Remediation’’ means that newer media, like the Internet, do not replace the older media, as in Ong’s (1987) early arguments about literacy replacing orality. Rather, the Internet has reshaped our writing, just as writing had reshaped orality, and just as multimedia is reshaping the Internet, television, radio and all other communication media.

Contrastive rhetoric researchers and EAP writing instructors need to understand this remediation process, especially for English for Science and Technology (EST) audiences and contexts. For example, hypertext’s visual and web-like features contrast with the rhetorical traditions of verbal information and linear argumentation that are common in US business and technical English (Kress, 1998); but these same features correspond rather well with the spontaneous and presence-based orality of South American rhetorical traditions (Cornejo Polar, 1994). Thus, South American ESP and EST students are most likely comfortable with the purposes and forms of hypertext, but they may not be aware of why these forms and purposes do not fit rhetorical situations typically addressed by US business and technical English. Furthermore, they may superimpose the hypertext features and their rhetorical traditions on the purposes and functions of US business and technical English, and not recognize why this combination is not effective. Thus, EAP need to teach not only the genres of business and scientific English (e.g. proposals, reports, and policy documents), but also how these business and technical genres function differently across cultures and communication media.

# 2. Media and cultural patterns

The scholarly debate about the relations of cultural patterns and communication media has been a long and fruitful one; it is particularly helpful for EAP/L2 writing instructors because it shows how culturally determined, and subsequently ethnocentric, many conceptions of L2 writing are. Plato (1956) originally argued that writing—the newest and most significant communication technology—would have damaging cultural and rhetorical effects because of its inherent weaknesses as compared to orality. According to Plato, writing would deteriorate memory, wreak havoc on logical constructions, and create an artificial reality. As a result, cultures that embrace writing would become inferior mentally, socially, and logically. Later, Ong (1987) traced the evolution of oral societies into literate societies, arguing that the development of writing radically changed cultural and rhetorical patterns. Pre-literate societies developed cultural and communicative patterns based on the oral medium: repetition to increase memory and transference; logic based on narrative organizational patterns; and persuasion based on ‘‘presence’’, a development of concrete sensory language that evokes context, personal relationships, and events. Ong (1987) then argues that with the advent of literacy and writing, these cultural patterns changed: concision instead of repetition; analytical organizational patterns instead of narrative; and persuasion based on formal logic rather than presence.1 In the 1960s, McLuhan (1962) offered similar deterministic accounts of communication media such as television and radio; in other words, the medium was the message in that the physical structure of the medium superimposed rhetorical and cultural patterns on its audiences.

In the mid 1980s and into the 1990s, many scholars began to discount the simplicity of these deterministic theories, arguing instead for mutually constitutive patterns. These relationships were based on the degree of commonality and difference between the broad socio-cultural patterns, the communication patterns that the media reinforced, and the specific socio-historical context in which the media are associated. Martı´n-Barbero (1993), a Colombian communication scholar, and Grossberg (1992), a US scholar, both note that while communication media such as movies, television, and print journalism do encourage or reinforce certain rhetorical and cultural patterns, the effect of this influence varies greatly. These scholars argue for exploring the ways local cultures appropriate, resist, and even reject cultural patterns associated with both the content and form of communication media. Kaufer and Carley (1993) similarly posit theories of mutually constitutive relationships among cultural patterns, writing, and orality. They explore the social and cultural dynamics reinforced—but not determined—by the print media.

Rarely does one medium supplant another one, as Ong (1987) originally argued. Rather, the rhetoric of one medium corresponds more closely to a certain culture than another medium, thus reinforcing the rhetorical patterns of that culture. Kaufer and Carley (1993) do not extend this comparison to cross-cultural inquiries, but the connection is obvious. Some cultures feel more comfortable with certain media over others because the patterns reinforced by these media generally correspond well with their overall cultural patterns. For example, as I document elsewhere (Thatcher, 1999, 2000) and later outline in this paper, the South Americans in one organization were more comfortable with orality to mediate organizational relationships because of their collective, particular, and interpersonal values, while their US counterparts were more comfortable with writing because of their individual, universal, and analytical values.

Bolter and Grusin (1999) further explore this media–culture relationship in their conception of remediation and update the media–culture debate with discussions of email and hypertext. They argue that communication technology does not supplant older technology, but rather remediates it, thus inspiring different types of mediations between communicators and older media than before; electronic discourses such as email and hypertext (exemplified by websites) have not replaced orality and writing, but they have changed the way people write and speak. Bolter and Grusin demonstrate how early newspaper page designs, which were text based, are now significantly influenced by more visual media; some newspapers are even beginning to look like websites. In addition, television newscasts now integrate hypertext technologies, such as buttons and flashing screens, into their oral–visual reports, making some newscasts appear more like a webpage than a television screen.

Recent developments (Bolter & Grusin, 1999; Kaufer & Carley, 1993) offer a compelling picture into culture and communication media, shedding light on the rhetorical traditions that ESP and ESL students might bring to the EAP classroom. In addition to distinct textual patterns, our ESP and ESL students might easily transfer or superimpose their rhetorical assumptions of writing on their academic writing assignments. Their assumptions about writing’s function, its relationship to the culture as a whole, audience–author relations, informational needs, and stylistic preferences might differ from the ESL instructor’s assumptions. Furthermore, this transfer will most likely include the influence that other communication media, such as the Internet, have exerted over writing in that culture, revealing media–culture relations as dynamic, especially because of the growing international influence of email and the Internet.

As EAP instructors, we need to help our students adapt their writing to the rhetorical context, which means that they need to understand the purpose, audience–author relations, informational needs, organizational structures, and stylistic preferences of writing in that context and how these rhetorical assumptions differ around the world. To carry out these pedagogical objectives, EAP/L2 writing instructors first need to help their students understand the basic rhetorical patterns reinforced by the different communication media. They then need to help them contextualize the communication media in the predominant cultural values of the context, which helps students understand how each medium works rhetorically in each cultural context. The following section outlines the basic rhetorics of orality, writing, email, and hypertext—not in a deterministic sense, but from a more remediated perspective, which shows how the communication media and cultural patterns around the world can combine into distinct rhetorical patterns.

# 3. Rhetorics of orality, writing, email, and hypertext

Some scholars (see Kaufer & Carley, 1993) have argued that orality tends to encourage a rhetoric that is narrative in structure, emphasizing repetition and aiding memory. Since this medium relies on the presence of a speaker and a hearer, there is also a heightened dependence on the communication context for meaning, and a greater propensity for concrete and visual imagery, encouraging what Stewart and Bennett (1991) call ‘‘horizontal’’ or ‘‘perceptual’’ thinking, as opposed to analytical thinking. On the other hand, writing has been associated with more analytical thinking patterns, distanced interpretation skills, and abstract cognitive relationships (Ong, 1987; Kaufer & Carley, 1993), reinforcing what Stewart and Bennett (1991: pp. 22–25) call ‘‘deep’’ and ‘‘analytical’’ thinking. The development of writing is also correlated with ‘‘more developed’’ forms of communities (Kaufer & Carley, 1993). These ‘‘developed’’ communities are based on abstract, rule of law approaches for regulating interpersonal behavior and community relationships.

The rhetorics of email and hypertext are more difficult to define perhaps because they are newer media. According to Moran and Hawisher (1998), email tends to have a decided public/private duality; although the communicator is isolated and alone when communicating, the communication can be exceedingly public. The technological issues of storage, retrievability, and speed encourage certain rhetorical characteristics. Moran and Hawisher (1998) argue that email fosters illusions of intimacy, perhaps because of its immediacy and ostensible privacy. Email is a more decontextualized medium because it does not offer the contextual cues that orality or other media offer.

Hypertext is an electronic medium exemplified by Internet websites and has been distinguished from text communication by its lack of linearity; the interlinkings of information creates the ‘‘web’’ metaphors. The New Mexico State University website, for example, is a hypertext communication because it contains many thousands of texts, pictures, sound bytes, files, documents, and other information all interrelated in complex, simultaneous ways. Kress (1998) argues that hypertext is more audience-driven than many communication media; since readers can create their own unique paths, they are offered some semblance of authorship. Hypertext integrates written text with graphics and sounds in ways that are impossible for orality and writing. It is uniquely contextualized by its links to other websites, forming complex ideological and social relations with these sites (Kress, 1998). Hypertext is perhaps the most explicitly global medium because of the World Wide Web.

The central inquiries in this paper are as follows: How do the rhetorics of orality, writing, email, and hypertext correlate with the vastly distinct rhetorical and cultural traditions around the world? And how does this correlation influence the writing patterns that ESL and EAP students will bring to the classroom? Since comparing these four communication media (i.e. orality, writing, email, and hypertext) to all rhetorical and cultural traditions is far beyond the scope of this paper, I have chosen instead to compare the media to three major intercultural variables: relation of individual to the other, application of norms or rules, and roles of context in communication. This comparison draws on the highly interdisciplinary work of intercultural and cross-cultural studies (see Kramsch, 2001). This comparison will exemplify how and why ESL and EAP students bring very different rhetorical assumptions about writing to our classrooms.

# 4. Framework for intercultural comparisons

Before exploring these questions, it is important to lay out a framework and rationale for this type of intercultural comparison, showing why it is relevant to EAP/L2 writing inquiries. This framework is also essential for understanding how to do cross-cultural comparisons both ethically and accurately. It is well documented that cross-cultural comparisons are difficult because they require reducing the complexities of a given culture into a framework that permits comparison with another culture (see Bhawuk & Triandis, 1996). This critique of reductionism has also been consistently directed at contrastive rhetoric (see, for example, Leki, 1997). This comparative frame has been severely criticized by two other very different (but oddly complimentary) approaches, both of which valorize individual differences and local situations. Arguing from a postmodernist and postcolonial perspective, some theorists valorize the complexly fragmented, yet highly individuated and localized subjectivity of writers and their relations to power, politics, and ideology (see, for example, Blyler, 1998). One major consequence of this view is that ‘‘difference’’ (Higgins, 1999: p. 236) becomes such a strong lens, and the complexity and uniqueness of local situations and cultures are so overtly valorized, that cross-cultural comparisons are not only impossible from a logistical standpoint, they are also unethical because of the power relations that are created by the reduction of cultural complexity and the intercultural comparative frame (see Higgins, 1999: pp. 235–237). It is interesting to note, however, that most cross-cultural researchers in the area of human rights and international law (Glendon, 1999; Higgins, 1999) reject this difference-based, postcolonial approach because of the strong, practical need to articulate workable cross-cultural policies.

Other scholars (Spack, 1997), coming more from romanticist rhetoric, generally deny the influences of larger cultural patterns and valorize the inherent individuality of L2 writers. This view ignores the influence of culture and rhetoric on individual writers, rejecting a long history of valid research in rhetoric, linguistics, anthropology, and communication. According to Charney (1996) and Lucy (1996), both views oddly coalesce to work against effective generalization about the influences of larger cultural and rhetorical patterns; that is, they do not effectively explain how the larger cultural patterns become the repertoire of rhetorical strategies that authors and audiences draw upon in rhetorical situations (see Thatcher, 2000). In addition, since both views prioritize the individual rather than the group, they correlate closely to US conceptions of individualism, as defined by many crosscultural researchers (Hofstede, 1984; Stewart & Bennett, 1991; Trompenaars, 1994).

To develop an ethical and valid intercultural frame, L2 researchers need to start with similarities based on shared contexts. Then, differences can be embedded in the framework of these similarities (Bhawuk & Triandis, 1996; Lucy, 1996). This embedding of differences in a framework of similarities works against analyzing a second culture using the cultural constructs of the first culture (Bhawuk & Triandis 1996: pp. 23–24), thus establishing an ethical common ground in which to operationalize and compare the variables of both cultures in an intercultural context. These ‘‘similarities’’ are not the modernist conceptions of progress or other hegemonic narratives that have been used, often unethically, when comparing cultures. They are shared contexts or thresholds of interaction that are common—and perhaps unique—to humans. For many intercultural scholars (e.g. Stewart & Bennett, 1991), the shared contexts tend to be time, relations to each other, relations to nature, and a conception of humanity.

In my comparison, I have chosen to focus on three variables that are common to all human experience: relations of individuals to groups (individualism vs. collectivism), applications of rules (universal vs. particular), and roles of context in communication (high vs. low context). Even though all humans share these experiences, the values they develop to deal with these experiences radically differ. These value differences are often defined as cultures. Furthermore, cultures themselves differ internally or intraculturally in the ways they deal with these human experiences. Thus, it is important to argue for a continuum of behavior with predominant bell curve differences marking major intercultural differences (see Hofstede, 1984; Trompenaars, 1994).

Adopting this framework in the following section, I overview three major crosscultural variables to exemplify how different groups of L2 writers might approach a rhetorical situation involving writing, orality, email, and hypertext with different sets of strategies and expectations. As explained earlier, L2 writing instructors need to understand these rhetorical relations to communication media in order to teach their students to be effective L2 communicators.

# 5. Comparing cultural variables to communication media

# 5.1. Individualism–collectivism

The first variable explores how individuals and groups relate to and influence each other. Many cross-cultural researchers (Hofstede, 1984; Stewart & Bennett, 1991; Trompenaars, 1994) label this variable as individualism–collectivism. Generally, individualism exists when people tend to define themselves, view the world, and negotiate through life based on individual identities and efforts. In individualist societies, there is an emphasis on personal space, freedom, creativity, self-celebration, and personal judgments. The self tends to be measured by how directly it effects change, and tends to see itself against or outside the world. Hofstede (1984), Stewart and Bennett (1991), and Trompenaars (1994) argue that the value of individualism tends to rank very high in the US and in other countries such as Australia, South Africa, and western European-Protestant countries. Of course, in these countries, not everyone is individualistic; rather, there is a preponderance of individualism or individualism ranks very high as a desired or positive value. The predominant communication characteristics of individualism are expressiveness and directness. Expressiveness relies on personal intimacy cues to signal accessibility to the social relationship (Stewart & Bennett, 1991). Directness is used to situate the discourse topic, and there is an emphasis on personal authorship.

Collectivism is when people define themselves, view the world, and negotiate through life based on social or familial groups. The person’s place in society is usually defined by birth with no significant chances for social mobility. There is an emphasis of shared traditions and interests, the good of the in-group, and maintaining face. Often, the self is measured by how well it orchestrates relational solidarity. Hofstede (1984) and others (Stewart & Bennett, 1991; Trompenaars, 1994) argue that collectivism ranks high in many countries in Latin America, Asia, and the Middle East. Obviously, these countries have individualistic people, but collectivism ranks higher as the preferred cultural value. Communication patterns in collective cultures tend to be indirect with complex and subtle invocations of social networks, interpersonal relationships, and personal intentions. Argumentative structures are complex, and are based on a social, horizontal logic (Stewart & Bennett, 1991).

These two variables—individualism and collectivism—seem to manifest themselves quite differently within the three communication media. One of the traditional arguments about orality (Ong, 1987) is that it reinforces cultural collectivity. Orality tends to be the mechanism of sharing traditions and maintaining face and relational solidarity. It seems to have a much weaker role in individualist cultures; orality is relegated to expressing personal opinions and beliefs, but is certainly not the backbone of society, as it is in many collectivist cultures.

Writing, on the other hand, seems to correlate very strongly with individualist cultures, most notably those with strong Protestant foundations (see Trompenaars, 1994). Writing seems to represent the distance, isolation, and personal space of individualistic cultures. Often, writing and written communication become the backbone of the laws, rules, and regulations that allow individualistic cultures to flourish (Stewart & Bennett, 1991). Writing does not have the same influence in collective cultures. Shared traditions, relational solidarity, and maintaining face can be accomplished through writing, but the preferred, and the most effective, medium is still orality.

Knowledge of these media is critical for L2 writing research and teaching. For example, in cross-cultural organizations in Ecuador (Thatcher, 1999), the communication patterns of many South Americans were more oral, contextual, particular, and narrative, while the patterns of US personnel were more written, acontextual, universal, and analytical. More significantly, these patterns corresponded to contrastive roles and purposes for writing and orality. Many of the US communicators initiated discourse based on circumstances that they thought writing would solve, further reinforcing their individualistic values. Thus, the audience– author interactions, information needs, document design, and content organization seemed to be developed from and for written literacies. On the other hand, many South American personnel initiated discourse based on situations that they thought orality should address, further reinforcing their collective and interpersonal approach to organizational behavior (Thatcher, 2000). They often assessed information needs, document design, and content organization based on this oral literacy. Only when the South American and US writers understood these contrastive relations to writing and orality were they able to carry out effective and ethical communication with each other. This kind of cross-cultural media and cultural literacy is critical for L2 writing classrooms, both ESP and EAP; a student may develop a well written L2 document, but unless that document corresponds to the rhetorical roles of writing in the target culture, it will most likely fail and offend the audience of that culture.

The relation of individual–collective variables to email and hypertext does not seem as clear-cut as with orality and writing, perhaps pointing to new cultural values that may be a product of these more recent remediations (Bolter & Grusin, 1999). Email seems to have the distance and isolation of individualistic cultures, but the illusions of intimacy, dynamism, and sense of community that are more prevalent in collectivist cultures. Interestingly, the ‘‘web’’ metaphor for hypertext communication actually symbolizes the collective approach, with the person at the center orchestrating relational solidarity. Hypertext is also more integrated with audio-visual elements, which are more characteristic of orality and collectivist cultures.

While I was a professor in Quito, Ecuador, I carried out a study of how well my Ecuadorian students felt that email and hypertext fit their general rhetorical traditions and patterns. Most of their concern was over the lack of social cues available in these media and how this lack of cues made it more difficult to communicate with those in their collective, in-groups. One student mentioned that ‘‘I lose all the emotion on email and the internet. . .I cannot communicate all that I want to. It is really difficult.’’ This student explained that several times she was engaged in ‘‘chat’’, but because she could not convey emotion, tone of voice, and other extralinguistic factors, she ended up calling her friend instead. She explained that with the contextual cues of the telephone she could be more herself (puedo ser ma´s yo).

It was interesting to note, however, that many of the Ecuadorians thought that one advantage of email and hypertext was that the lack of context actually permitted a more abstract approach to their discussions. In an online discussion group, the students began debating the use of the Ecuadorian military to help crack down on crime. After witnessing this debate, I asked the students about the effect of the lack of context on their argumentative strategies. Over half of the students thought that the lack of context encouraged a more ‘‘objective’’, ‘‘reasoned’’, and ‘‘productive’’ discussion of the issues. In other words, this lack of context worked against the strong tendency in collectivist cultures to focus on in-group and outgroup distinctions when arguing points, and they were able to focus more on the abstract principles and theories. Perhaps, as Bolter and Grusin (1999) argue, the Internet might be encouraging a less collective approach in other forms of Ecuadorian communication, including writing. Much more research needs to be carried out to address these relationships. If an L2 writer, for example, comes from a very individualistic tradition that also has high incidences of hypertext communication, what kinds of L2 writing patterns would result? Does the L2 writing exhibit a complex mixture of individualistic and collectivistic patterns based on the remediation of hypertext communication?

# 5.2. Universal–particular

The next major cultural value is the application of norms and standards. All cultures have developed rules (i.e. norms or standards for dealing with behavior). The flexibility of these rules and the ways they are developed and enforced become strong cultural identifiers. Most intercultural researchers use the terms universal and particular to signify two major approaches. In universalist cultures, there is the ideal of the rule-based society. Standards are set to define what is good and right in spite of the social standings of the individuals. The ideal (rarely achieved) is to apply the standards to all without exception.

In particularist cultures, what is moral and right depends on relations and context (i.e. who did what to whom and in what situation). Exceptions based on social relationships are the rule. Hofstede (1984), Stewart and Bennett (1991), and Trompenaars (1994) link universal to individualist cultures and particular to collectivist cultures. Universal approaches seem to provide the rational, rule-based context for individual expression, achievement, and isolation. In contrast, the social networks in collectivist cultures are the mechanisms for social, economic, cultural, and legal relationships, and therefore, the logic of these networks becomes the logic for applying norms and standards.

The relation of universal and particular to communication media is a particularly important variable for L2 writing instruction. In my L2 writing research in South America, many of the South American personnel preferred orality because it facilitated a particular case-by-case approach to the applications of norms and procedures (Thatcher, 1999, 2000). This value was so entrenched that most of the South American writers had never worked from written policies and procedures. On the other hand, the US writers working in these South American contexts automatically correlated writing with the universal. Writing something down and accepting it meant universalizing it; it meant developing the distance to analyze and create objectivity and equal application. The US personnel experienced great difficulties in developing oral policies and procedures based on personal relations and case-by-case scenarios (see Thatcher, 1999). The two media, however, were not deterministic. Many of the South American personnel brought their oral and particular rhetorics to the writing situation, while many of the US personnel brought their written and universal rhetorics to the oral situation. However, this lack of correspondence between the medium and rhetorical purpose created even greater intercultural communication problems.

L2 writing instructors need to understand and then effectively teach the roles of orality and writing in regulating interpersonal behavior across cultures. For example, US instructors working with more particular–collective students need to understand that writing probably does not have the same constitutive, normalizing purpose in many of those cultures as it has been assigned in US cultures.

The ways that email mediates the universal and particular cultural values are of great importance to L2 instructors, especially because almost all L2 students use this electronic media. Since writing is so closely related to universal precedence-setting values, and orality to particular case-by-case norms, instructors need to carefully consider the influences of electronic media, which tend to be situated theoretically between writing and orality (Kress, 1998; Moran & Hawisher, 1998). In the area of law, for example, the debate about whether email is ‘‘writing’’ is becoming critical given the boom of Internet commerce. In the US, only recently has email been designated in critical legal precedents as legally binding (‘‘Symposium’’ 2000), and only when the authentication of signatures is possible. Canada similarly recognizes email as ‘‘writing’’ for e-commerce and other contracts. However, in a recent study of Latin American countries (‘‘Symposium’’ 2000), only Colombia recognizes email as ‘‘writing’’ for legal contracts, and only when authentication is guaranteed (this legislation occurred in 1999). The same study found that Brazil, Peru, Ecuador, Chile, Argentina, and Mexico did not— and have no plans to—consider email as writing. As the survey explains, there are many legal, cultural, economic, and technological reasons for not considering email as ‘‘writing’’ in Latin America. Thus, L2 writing instructors obviously cannot assume the same purposes, exigencies, and author–audience relationships with email in the areas of policies, laws, and other standardizing efforts in intercultural contexts.

Furthermore, hypertext writing is considered to be ‘‘soft’’ by many US legal scholars; it does not have the legal contractual ability of traditional print communication. Questions remain, such as ‘‘Is a link to another corporation’s website cause for copyright infringement?’’ or ‘‘Is linking to certain websites and avoiding others a reason for collusion?’’ The US legal system is trying to articulate the logic of legal responsibility in Internet communication (‘‘Symposium’’ 2000). Other countries are considering similar legislation to clarify the actual legal binding authority of Internet/hypertext communication. Questions that need to be addressed include: What kinds of research designs can measure the universalizing or particularizing of media–participant relationships in hypertext and email communication? Are both of these electronic media creating new conceptions of universal and particular categories, essentially remediating these terms?

# 5.3. High context–low context

The next cultural value is the role of the context in the communicative interaction. This value focuses on the relations of communication contexts to communication patterns. All cultures communicate in contexts, but how they use these contexts in their communication differs radically. Hall (1976) originally developed the distinctions of high context and low context to study these roles. In high-context communication, there is a strong reliance on the contextual and social cues for its meaning. Here, good writing focuses on information that elucidates the influence of the social context on meaning of the communication. Connor (1996) and Hinds (1987) label this type of writing as a ‘‘reader-responsible’’ (Connor, 1996: p. 42), or writing in which the reader is expected to fill in the information and create the transitions. In high-context communication, there tends to be more non-verbal, indirect forms of communication and complex overtures or concrete sensory stimuli to evoke the physical, social, and interpersonal contexts that add meaning to the discourse. In addition to the increased reliance on context, the organization and development of high-context communication varies greatly depending on prior knowledge of the context. As Hall (1976) explains, when high-context communicators understand the context, their communication can be very quick and agile, often needing no more than a word or a glance. However, when the communication context is not understood, high-context communicators tend to painstakingly articulate or evoke into the coded text all the fine nuances of the context before communicating the main message. Victor (1992) explains that many Asian, Latin American, and Middle Eastern countries tend to value higher context communication, while Germany and German-Swiss cultures tend to value lower context communication. The US tends to be mid- to low-context.

In low-context communication, the meaning resides primarily in the explicitly coded part of the communication, not in the surrounding context. As a result, there is a focus on information that is specific to individuals at hand, increasing the involvement of a few select people. Connor (1996) and Hinds (1987) similarly label this type of writing as ‘‘reader-friendly’’, or writing that assumes a reduced reliance on the reader to bring in contextual cues and create transitions to understand the writing. In other words, there is an overt emphasis of organizational and transitional strategies to guide readers through the writing. From this view, good writing is focused on the accuracy and interpretation of the explicitly coded text.

These two different approaches to the roles of communication and readers encourage different rhetorical patterns in the four communication media. Highcontext communication correlates very closely with orality, while low-context communication correlates closely with writing (see Victor, 1992). Hinds (1987) makes a similar argument about Japanese ESP writers at US universities who bring the higher context and reader-responsible strategies to their English compositions. Their approaches directly contradict many traditional approaches to what good writing is in the US researchers need to understand that the typical reader-friendly, decontextualized US rhetorical approaches are culturally produced and, therefore, not transferable to many other cultural contexts.

The roles of context for email and hypertext are critical rhetorical inquiries as well. Moran and Hawisher (1998) argue that email is a decontextualized medium, maybe more so than written communication. Many email communicators have developed the use of emoticons (i.e. graphically codified symbols to represent emotions and context)—a logical approach in a medium that is too decontextualized for the communicators’ needs. Furthermore, hypertext incorporates audio-visual features such as color, photographs, graphics, voices, and sounds, which may invoke the context better, and in different ways, than writing and orality.

As mentioned earlier, my Ecuadorian students who come from a high-context culture were frustrated mostly with the lack of context in their email and hypertext communication. It was interesting to note that although almost all of these students were from the same culture and shared similar economic, social, and educational status, they all had a very difficult time contextualizing their email and hypertext discourse. Using the exact metaphor that Hall (1976) uses to describe how high-context communicators ‘‘context’’ a very low-context medium, one of the students marveled at how their attempts to ‘‘structure’’ their communication had become as fastidious as ‘‘the debates in their polemicized National Congress’’. Some members were offended by long messages, so they wanted to limit the lengths of messages. Others did not like messages about football, racing, and other sports, so they wanted to monitor those. Still others thought that jokes, songs, and recipes were great things to share, while some members wanted these types ruled and monitored. A few suggested a complex system of subject-line abbreviations, including what city they are talking about, what topic, and how long the message was. In the end, however, all of the members slowly began to feel more comfortable with the lower context medium and, as previously mentioned, some even began to prefer it.

From another perspective, a Chilean and a Mexican legal scholar argue that e-commerce is difficult in their countries because Chilen˜os and Mexicans prefer the relational, social solidarity associated with normal commerce (‘‘Symposium’’ 2000). It could be argued, however, that because of its many communicative features, hypertext has the potential to best represent the complex sociality of Latin American commerce. How is the explosive use of hypertext (and the Internet) influencing the more low-context writing styles of US writers? Might hypertext influence L2 writers from more collective cultures to maintain a higher-context style?

Unfortunately, very little research on how email and hypertext influence the rhetorical strategies of high-context cultures has been done. For example, might L2 writers from more high-context cultures be more capable of adapting to the lowcontext rhetorical patterns of US academic writing? In other words, might my Ecuadorians students, who become thoroughly adept at email and hypertext communication, be better at adapting to lower-context communication styles? Or would they incorporate high-context strategies like the emoticons in their low-context writing?

# 6. Conclusion

In this paper, space limitations have only allowed for a comparison of three intercultural variables (i.e. individualism–collectivism, universal–particular, high context–low context) with orality, writing, email, and hypertext. Other variables such as religion, political systems, masculinity and femininity, education, and assumptions about technology also influence the rhetorical assumptions and uses of orality, writing, and email. The discussion of these three variables should be sufficient to demonstrate, however, that L2 writing takes place in the context of complex intercultural interactions and involves distinct uses of rapidly changing communication media. As a result, contrastive rhetoric researchers and L2 writing instructors cannot bring their naturalized assumptions about the roles of orality, writing, and email when teaching students from any culture. Each cultural tradition corresponds to different uses of these media. Therefore, a study of cross-cultural writing implies a study of the different uses of the media—in addition to contrastive textual organizations—a doubly complex and challenging inquiry. If EAP researchers and teachers do not understand and teach this dual nature of L2 writing, they might be teaching a form and purpose of writing that is naturalized as the norm in all cultures, perpetuating what most cross-cultural researchers would label as a classic case of ethnocentrism.

# References

Bhawuk, D. P., & Triandis, H. C. (1996). The role of culture theory in the study of culture and intercultural training. In D. Landis, & R. S. Bhagat (Eds.), Handbook of intercultural training (2nd ed.) (pp. 17–34). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.

Blyler, N. (1998). Taking a political turn: the critical perspective and research in professional communication. Technical Communication Quarterly, 7, 33–52.   
Bolter, J., & Grusin, R. (1999). Remediation: Understanding new media. Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.   
Charney, D. (1996). Empiricism is not a four-letter word. College Composition and Communication, 47, 567–593.   
Connor, U. (1996). Contrastive rhetoric: Cross-cultural aspects of second-language writing. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Cornejo Polar, A. (1994). Escribir en el aire: Ensayo sobre la heterogeneidad sociocultural en las literaturas andinas [Writing in the air: Essay on the socio-cultural heterogeneity in Andean literatures]. Lima, Peru: Editorial Horizonte.   
Glendon, M. A. (1999). Foundations of human rights: the unfinished business. American Journal of Jurisprudence, 44, 1–14.   
Grossberg, L. (1992). We gotta get out of this place: Popular culture and postmodern culture. New York: Routledge.   
Hall, E. (1976). Beyond culture. New York: Anchor Books.   
Higgins, T. E. (1999). Regarding rights: an essay honoring the fiftieth anniversary of the Universal Declaration of Human Rights. Columbia Human Rights Law Review, 30, 225–247.   
Hinds, J. (1987). Reader versus writer responsibility: a new typology. In U. Connor, & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 141–152). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Hofstede, G. (1984). Culture’s consequences: International differences in work-related values. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.   
Kaplan, R. B. (1966). Cultural thought patterns in intercultural education. Language Learning, 16, 1–20.   
Kaufer, D. S., & Carley, K. M. (1993). Communication at a distance: The influence of print on sociocultural organization and change. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Kramsch, C. (2001). Intercultural communication. In R. Carter, & D. Nunan (Eds.), Teach English to speakers of other languages (pp. 201–206). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Kress, G. (1998). Visual and verbal modes of representation in electronically mediated communication: the potentials of new forms of text. In I. Snyder (Ed.), Page to screen: Taking literacy into the electronic era (pp. 53–79). New York: Routledge.   
Leki, I. (1997). Cross-talk: ESL issues and contrastive rhetoric. In C. Severino, J. C. Guerra, & J. E. Butler (Eds.), Writing in multicultural settings (pp. 234–244). New York: Modern Language Association of America.   
Lucy, J. (1996). The scope of linguistic relativity. In J. J. Gumperz, & S. C. Levinson (Eds.), Rethinking linguistic relativity (pp. 37–69). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Martı´n-Barbero, J. (1993). Communication, culture and hegemony: From the media to mediations. Newbury Park, CA: Sage (E. Fox & R. A. White, Trans.).   
McLuhan, M. (1962). The Gutenberg galaxy. Toronto: University of Toronto Press.   
Moran, C., & Hawisher, G. (1998). The rhetorics and languages of electronic mail. In I. Snyder (Ed.), Page to screen: Taking literacy into the electronic era (pp. 80–101). New York: Routledge.   
Ong, W. (1987). Oralidad y escritura: Tecnologı´as de la Palabra [Orality and writing: Technologies of the word]. Mexico City: Fonda de la cultura Econo´mica (A. Sherp, Trans.).   
Plato (1956). Phaedrus. New York: Macmillan.   
Scollon, R., & Scollon, S. W. (2001). Intercultural communication: A discourse approach. (2nd ed.). Oxford, UK: Blackwell.   
Spack, R. (1997). The rhetorical construction of multilingual students. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 765–774.   
Stewart, E. C., & Bennett, M. J. (1991). American cultural patterns: A cross-cultural perspective. (Revised ed.). Yarmouth, ME: Intercultural Press.   
Symposium. (2000). Responding to the legal obstacles to electronic commerce in Latin America: general questionnaire. Arizona Journal of International and Comparative Law, 17, 1–66.   
Thatcher, B. (1999). Cultural and rhetorical adaptations for South American audiences. Technical Communication, 46, 177–195.   
Thatcher, B. (2000). L2 professional writing in a U.S. and South American context. Journal of Second Language Writing, 9, 41–69.

Trompenaars, F. (1994). Riding the waves of culture: Understanding diversity in global business. New York: McGraw-Hill. Victor, D. (1992). International business communication. New York: HarperCollins.

Barry Thatcher is an associate professor of rhetoric and professional communication at New Mexico State University. His research focuses on Latin American and US intercultural communication, the history of rhetoric in Latin America, and US/Mexico border rhetoric.