# Language as academic purpose

Joan Turner 

University of London, Language Unit, Goldsmiths College, New Cross, London, SE14 6NW, UK

# Abstract

In this article, I argue for an understanding of EAP to be mobilised more around language, its materiality, especially in written form, and the intellectual challenge of learning it. Concomitantly, I argue against the increasing technicisation of language, as it is embodied in the regulatory framework of institutions and its emaciation as an intellectual challenge, partly as a result of the language/content dichotomy which positions language in the subordinate role, and partly because of the self-understanding of EAP practice itself. I argue for a shift in conceptualisation from language as instrument to language as constitutive, and that language proficiency in the academic context is as important as content. With such a re-conceptualisation comes a need for EAP to re-think its practices and to seek to enhance the value of language work in the market of intellectual labour.

$©$ 2004 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Language/content dichotomy; Technicisation of language; Language as constitutive; Foregrounding language proficiency; Language proficiency and time

# 1. The contemporary economy of EAP

The raison d’etre for EAP is the fact that mother tongue speakers of languages other than English wish to undertake their undergraduate or postgraduate education in an English speaking country or at a university in their own country which teaches in English. However, the social and economic conditions of and for EAP have changed substantially since its beginnings in the 1960s and 1970s. Then EAP was seen as a necessary adjunct to the academic success of individual students, whose success was in turn necessary to the development of technology in their countries of origin, frequently former British colonies. Projects were funded by

British government agencies, such as the Overseas Development Agency, and as a result, as both Benesch (2001) and Swales (1985) acknowledge, EST, English for Science and Technology (predominantly what EAP was initially) was where the money was.

The history of ESP projects since their beginnings in the 1960s and 1970s has been frequently documented and overviews can be found in Strevens (1988), Robinson (1980), Coffey (1984), Swales (1988), Dudley-Evans and St. John (1998), and Benesch (2001).

While English language teaching, and more frequently teacher training, remains to some extent a British-funded export, especially in areas with emerging economies, such as Eastern Europe, the specifically EAP ‘business’ in Britain has grown dramatically in recent years due to the necessary ‘importing’ of overseas students, in order to boost the incomes of universities whose state funding has decreased. The contemporary socio-political and economic context for EAP in Britain then is not so much international ‘aid’ and ‘development’ as the global economy of higher education. The financial viability of British universities is increasingly dependent on their marketability to what are known as ‘overseas’ or ‘international’ students. This categorisation has its primary significance in relation to fee status. ‘ Overseas’ students’ fees are considerably higher than ‘home’ and European Union students. As might be expected, these students often do not have English as their first language. Without attempting to quantify the ratio of demand to supply, there is embodied in this situation an about-turn in the politico-economic situation in terms of who is fuelling demand and who is supplying. We (that is, university institutions in Britain) need them as much as they (the high-fee paying) students need us.1

Within this broad re-conceptualisation of education as a market economy, one thing remains constant, and that is the low economic and intellectual exchange value of language work. From its outset, EAP was the poor relation of the aid and development project. It remains the poor relation in the international education market. The topic of status is of course one that recurs not only in the EAP literature, but in any context where language teaching, study skills or literacy teaching is seen as a service. I am with Johns (1997: 157) when she says that we should not ‘wring our hands and bemoan our marginality’, but I want to suggest that, through its own self-understanding, EAP has to a certain extent colluded in its own marginalisation. This is because from its outset, it has accepted a role as an economic and intellectual short-cut.

# 2. EAP as economic and intellectual short-cut

The short-cut mentality endemic to EAP is encapsulated well in Dhaif’s (1985) critique of Swales’s (1985) suggestion that language centres should extend their repertoire to teaching research English. Swales was addressing the status issue and warned of the ‘dangerously inhibited view’(1985: 213) of language centres which focussed only on undergraduates and materials development for their courses. Dhaif (1985: 225) adduced the ‘financial short cut’ criterion which was crucial to ‘the evaluation of ESP projects in developing countries’ against the ‘research English’ proposal, arguing that teaching ‘research English’ would only meet the needs of an ‘elite group of specialists’ rather than large numbers of students, thereby failing the ‘financial short cut’ criterion. It seems therefore that maximum throughput of students with minimum attainment levels in the language in the shortest possible time was the conceptual framework within which EAP was conceived.

Such a framework is indeed present in Coffey’s (1984) definition of EAP in which he stresses the importance of speed and thereby the shortage of time for EAP. He stated (1984: 3):

the student’s needs may be the quick and economical use of the English language to pursue a course of academic study, in which case we have English for Academic Purposes.

While this quote also illustrates the needs analysis basis of EAP pedagogy, I suggest that the restricted time frame and limited financial outlay that was accepted for EAP, implanted also an intellectual short-cut mentality. Time is money, but time is also intellectual investment. The continuing short-cut mentality underestimates the time it takes to really get to grips with the language, and undervalues the role of language in academic performance. Students seem not to want to spend time, effort, and money on getting to grips with the language, but to proceed as quickly as possible to the ‘real’ thing. My contention is that language proficiency is an important part of the ‘real’ thing, and that EAP work has an important role to play, but needs to re-think its own self-understanding.

# 3. The technicisation of language

The assumption that language proficiency can be gained quickly, as well as easily, has been helped by the success of global screening tests, such as IELTS or TOEFL. Such tests have become part of the regulatory framework of universities, where at both undergraduate and postgraduate levels, a language test score is a prerequisite to registration on the programme of study. Students’ scores therefore slot comfortably into a checklist of easily ticked off registration requirements.

The combined effects of a demand for easily measurable and easily processed university entrance criteria and the successful marketing of global language tests constitute a technicisation of language which is reducing the teaching of EAP to training for such tests, in Britain, predominantly for IELTS. My argument is not against the testing process per se, nor does it deny the need for some guidance on minimum thresholds of language proficiency, but it is a critique of how the tests have infiltrated institutional discourse and what is perhaps worse, how they distort students’ perceptions of the role of language use in academic performance.

Students seem to want to ‘train’ to reach the appropriate entrance level score or band rather than to engage with the language as an essential, and integral, part of their engaging with their subject of study. On the one hand, it seems that Brumfit’s (1985: 156) warning note on what teaching language as communication might lead to: ‘that once we have identified the hurdles to be leapt over, language is simply a matter of training in appropriate techniques’, is sounding only too loudly. On the other hand, what the IELTS test or the TOEFL test delivers underspecifies the complexity of language issues in the academic context. These tests do not, for example, even begin to give a sense of what Johns (1997) calls a ‘socio-literate’ perspective, a perspective that emphasises the social purposes of texts, writer and reader roles, and contexts. Nor do they challenge to any great degree the variety and range of vocabulary circulating in the greater spread of disciplines which L2 students now want to study.

The market for international education has opened up and students at all levels, undergraduate, postgraduate,2 and research are coming to Britain to study the performing and visual arts, business studies, and the newer interdisciplinary fields clustering around cultural and critical-theoretical studies in the humanities and social sciences, as well as the more traditional science and technology subjects. Many of these subjects demand longer periods of EAP study, not to mention a more in-depth focus on language. Felicity of style and the creative use of language may also be part and parcel of academic performance in some of the newer disciplinary and interdisciplinary fields. These include fields such as ‘visual culture’, which may draw on contemporary critical approaches to art history, anthropology, and sociology.

In this new and burgeoning international education market, different course types are emerging. Some institutions offer year-long foundation or bridging courses, usually done in conjunction with other departments, while others have simply lengthened their pre-sessionals,3 so that the somewhat paradoxical notion of a year-long pre-sessional also exists. This not only demonstrates a rather conservative nomenclature, but also a logic which serves to preserve both the in-built shorttermism discussed above, and the marginalised structure of EAP delivery. The over-weighting of EAP delivery in terms of summer pre-sessionals has a further deleterious effect, in that the majority of staff are employed only for short periods of time and therefore opportunities for building up links with receiving departments, and a greater understanding of the tasks, theories, and discourses that presessional students will be going on to work with, is lost. At the same time, an opportunity to consolidate EAP as a professional and academic practice is also lost, if posts for full-time staff are restricted. While the constitution of EAP as a discipline is underway, not least through the existence of this journal, as well as in recent publications, such as Flowerdew and Peacock (2001), whose series editors, in their preface, specifically talk of EAP as a ‘discipline’ (p. xiii), it would be a pity if its implementation in practice were restricted by assumptions of its pre-sessional only nature.

The positioning of language proficiency as a bureaucratic pre-requisite also implies a finality. It ignores the developmental nature of language use. There is no assumption that the student’s facility with English will improve, along with the familiarisation with the specific genres of interaction and performance that is required as s/he goes through a programme of study. This failure to see that language grows with content leads to the insidious perception that measured language proficiency is all there is to the role of language on a degree course. Furthermore, it has the deleterious knock-on effect that any continuing in-sessional EAP programme may be seen as only catering for students in ‘deficit’. This leads to situations where staff respond to problems they encounter with students’ language levels by raising the entrance score on IELTS. On the other hand, it can also lead to students hiding in the dark as it were, not attending in-sessional classes for fear of remedial status infliction. Such unhelpful scenarios are an effect of the institutional maintenance of what Swales (1990: 6) felicitously calls the ‘ivory ghetto of remediation’, denying academic respect to EAP practitioners as well as to their students. What they also show, of course, is a gross misunderstanding of the nature of language, its constitutive importance in academic performance, and the intellectual challenge of learning its uses and using it well.

# 4. The underestimation of language work

It is somewhat paradoxical that the materiality of language only becomes visible when there is something wrong (cf. Turner, 1999a, 1999b). When language is visible, it is marked, the effect of poor writing or cognitive deficiency or both. This explains why ‘language’ is often the catch-all term for problems with unmet standards, and the need for remediation. By contrast, academic success is rarely attributed to good language use. In other words, good language use is unmarked. Yet, it is clear that language use matters and is part of the assessment process. Christofides (2002) for example, in her study of two students’ progress at two different universities, found that tutors would often comment on language in the interests of improving a student’s work, and by implication, their marks. She gives the following example of a tutor’s comment:

Your conclusion flowed very clearly from your discussion. I have identified a number of small syntax and spelling mistakes which spoil the otherwise high standard of presentation—you need to do some work in this area to make good work even better. (Christofides, 2002:18)

While the attitude of pedagogical encouragement cannot be faulted, the implicit diminution (both quantitatively and qualitatively) of the work necessary to improve ‘small syntax’ errors can be. This comment was received towards the end of an MA course and it must be doubted whether the student has in fact time to improve their language proficiency, not to mention the underestimation of the intellectual labour involved in learning to use the syntax of another language correctly.

A degree of confusion over how to treat language issues in assessing students’ work was evidenced in Hartill’s (1997) study where she focussed particularly on tolerance of language errors. She found that some departments glossed over linguistic inaccuracies, while others were setting up their own proof-reading systems, paying post-graduate students to read international students’ work. This latter course of action seems to me to be an underacknowledged threat to EAP work, as well as harbouring a number of rather invidious conceptual inconsistencies. One crucial question is: what exactly does proof-reading consist of? Is it perhaps not predominantly a euphemism? Would not a degree of re-writing be involved? Does such re-writing then raise issues of plagiarism? These inter-related issues are language-based, but their complexity is not acknowledged when they are packaged as ‘proofreading’ and delegated to post-graduate students. Such institutional-political language issues need to be more widely foregrounded in EAP discourse.

I would suggest also that EAP practitioners become less tolerant of language errors and seek to promote attention to the materiality of written language at all levels, from spelling through to textual organisation. There is a tendency in EAP writing pedagogy to focus more on the macro- or structural levels of organisation, but accuracy at word or phrase level is also important. I do not want to re-hash the fluency/accuracy debate (Brumfit, 1984), but suggest that because fluency has largely won in EAP, we are over-lenient of our students’ mistakes. Such leniency may be partly an effect of our awareness, possibly greater than that of our colleagues in other departments, of the extent to which students have to adjust to a new learning and teaching environment. As a result of this awareness, we are reluctant to overburden students, nor do we want to give them a sense of inadequacy and risk their loss of confidence. We prefer to ease them in gently. However, we should not confuse caring for students’ well-being with leniency over their language use. At the risk of sounding a bit ruthless, I would argue that we should be less caring and more critical.

# 5. Language is critical in critical analysis

In the following extract from a PhD student’s work, I hope to show the complexity of language issues involved and the extent to which language proficiency is at their core. It is clear to me, working with the student as a language support tutor, that there is no problem with her understanding of the theoretical discourses she is working with, predominantly psychoanalysis and post-colonial theory. My discussions with her on her work and my requests for clarification show this. She has no problem in conveying things to me in spoken language. Her problem is manifestly with written English.

The repressed and victimised ‘others’ in Asian formation of modernity has been totally abandoned from social consciousness for long whose life has been disregarded in the hypocritic concept of the ‘ humanities’ conflicted with the designated sense of ‘progress’ through the march of economic development in the modern era.

If the first sentence had ended with consciousness, it would have made a powerful beginning. It works without the definite article which should strictly speaking go in front of ‘Asian’, and even the misaligned grammar of the plural ‘others’ and the singular verb might go unnoticed in the general flow of meaning. However, this is exactly the kind of thing that a PhD supervisor might recommend a student to ‘tidy up’ before the final submission. If the student has not had such things pointed out before, how will she recognise them? I would therefore argue that such sentence level grammatical features should be pointed out to the student along with everything else. They are as essential a part of the academic rigour that is expected of a PhD student, or indeed any student, as, for example, getting the date of a particular publication right.

Looking further at the example, it can be seen that at the level of word choice, the word ‘abandoned’ needs to be substituted by a semantically similar, but more appropriate verb in the context of the grammatical construction used. The word ‘excluded’ would work. In terms of the flow of meaning, the subordination ‘whose life has been disregarded’ seems an unnecessary tautology, while the phrase ‘in the hypocritic concept of the ‘‘humanities’’’ is another source of confusion for the reader. The preposition ‘in’ works as the beginning of an adverbial phrase, whether of space or time, following ‘has been disregarded’, but it is difficult to identify ‘the hypocritic concept of the humanities’ as a location. The student was able to explain this reference to me. She wanted to make the point that the so-called ‘humanities’ were ill-named because they were concerned not with human progress, but with economic progress. Here, she is therefore situating her specific argument in a wider discourse already circulating in the theoretical contexts of her work. This brings into play the well recognised textual management issue of acknowledging what would be shared information with the reader, without having to spell it out.

In this case, the student attempts to signal her scepticism of the term ‘humanities’ by putting it in inverted commas, but the conceptual conflict with economics and ‘progress’ is obscured by the overwrought wording and referencing all running together in the three consecutive adverbial phrases: ‘conflicted with the designated sense of ‘‘progress’’’, ‘through the march of economic development’ and ‘in the modern era’. Apart from the stylistic awkwardness of this strategy in English, the semantic compass of the areas referred to is also rather large. The student needs to make choices as to what she is foregrounding and what she is modifying, and these have to be located within clause structures rather than in adverbial phrases. This may be an issue of grammatical transfer as the student is Korean, and the syntactical structures of Korean are very different from English. There is no parallel for relative clauses, for example, and no prepositions as such (cf. Thompson, 1987). Susceptibility to such transfer is compounded by the fact that the student is working with data in her own language. In terms of implications for teaching, these contrastive syntax issues make a case for more focussed awareness and discussion of them than is the norm in EAP practice.

This student does not need an induction into critical thinking. She is quite intent on making an argument, and quite a powerful argument at that. This is evident in the use of words such as ‘repressed’ and ‘victimised’ in the first clause and the intensifier ‘totally’ and ‘abandoned’ in the next, whose semantic determination is inherently critical. However, her ability to achieve the critical force of her arguments and how they relate to her own original work, is marred by her inflexibility in using English. In order to make the kind of powerful statements that she wants to make, she needs to focus on her language proficiency more than the content. In fact, the falsity of this dichotomy is clear. Her use of language is a necessary part of the power of her arguments.

The rhetorical organisation of the extract is also an issue. I suggest, in my rewritten paragraph below, a version whereby the wider conceptual context comes first in a short, punchy, albeit also hedged, sentence. The issues which flow from that are developed and illustrated in subsequent sentences. The extensive changes in syntax and explicit logical relationship marking, as well as word choice and collocation, are shown in capitals.

The concept of the humanities IS SOMEWHAT HYPOCRITICAL. DESPITE ITS ASSOCIATION WITH progress, MODERNITY HAS BEEN CONCERNED MORE WITH ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT THAN WITH THE QUALITY OF HUMAN LIFE. IN THE CASE OF the repressed and victimised ‘others’ OF THE Asian formation of modernity, THEY HAVE LONG been EXCLUDED FROM social consciousness.

The language work necessary to get to the above paragraph is substantial, and cannot routinely be done, as I have just done, in a language support capacity. It cannot be taught in training for the IELTS test, nor is it tested. It is not a question of technical adjustment, nor is it a question of ‘tidying up’ the language (to quote a euphemism beloved of PhD supervisors). The extract above is symptomatic of the kinds of theoretical discourses in the humanities and some parts of the social sciences that contemporary EAP practitioners have to deal with. These discourses demand high levels of proficiency in the manipulation of words and phrases and a wide range of both general academic and specialist vocabulary. Yet the substantive nature of such language work is underrepresented in EAP discourse around skills and needs.

# 6. EAP: beyond skills

Teaching EAP, in the British higher education context at least, is predominantly skills-based. The background setting for such skills teaching is the university and the pedagogic genres of higher education, most prominently the lecture (listening to, and note-taking) the academic essay, and the seminar (presentation and discussion). The language skills of reading and the independent nature of research for writing which is usually reading-based are also important. All of these skills are ‘study skills’ and while some EAP curricula may identify a separate module entitled ‘study skills’ where things such as using the library, or time management, or examination techniques are dealt with separately, by and large the higher education pedagogic—genre-based skills cover ‘study skills’ as a whole.

There are procedural elements to such skills teaching that are of undoubted merit. Indeed, many ‘home’ students would benefit from a similar provision. L2 students, for example, are often complimented on their delivery of seminar papers, because they have paid attention to structuring and to the use of OHP slides, which ‘home’ students have not been specifically taught. The same applies to reading strategies and the processes of drafting and editing that are inculcated in writing classes.

A focus on ‘self-directed learning’ or learning to learn is also foregrounded in EAP curricula. The assumption of independent thinking and initiative-taking is taken for granted in British higher education and it is only when international students are not sure what is expected of them that this taken-for-grantedness becomes clear. Even PhD students, for instance, often expect much more ‘guidance’ (in their terms), from their supervisors than they get, a culturally embedded factor that was shown also in Belcher’s (1994) study. However, there is also a danger that concerns with procedures and strategies for study and ‘learning to learn’ may overdetermine the EAP curriculum. Students can become demotivated by the focus on study skills and the learning process when these become not only the intended outcome of practice, but also the topic content of texts and discussions facilitating those outcomes. As one Taiwanese student put it to me: ‘They [such topics] may be alright for British students who don’t know about studying but we already know all that’. This student obviously felt patronised, although she may have been overestimating her capabilities. Learning to learn in culturally different ways is certainly necessary, as these impinge on uses of language, but perhaps this can be achieved by interacting with more intellectually stimulating texts. This suggestion is similar to that of Horowitz (1986) on the process approach to writing where the basis for writing was restricted to personal meaning and discovery. In both cases, while there is some merit in the approaches, there is also an insularity and circularity that prohibits engagement with wider and more varied academic discourses.

In the humanities and social sciences, especially, it is the quality of engagement with the intellectual subject matter that is crucial. Such quality is determined not only by familiarity with the kinds of questions that the disciplinary discourse asks and the analytical terms that are its theoretical signposts, but also by the ability to manipulate a wide range of vocabulary and structures and not have the ‘quality’ of the argument ‘marred’ by infelicities of style and expression. The focus on skills tends to value communicability over linguistic expression, but the fact is that, for better or worse, how something is expressed is important. As Cameron has put it:

linguistic bigotry is among the last publicly expressible prejudices left to members of the western intelligentsia. Intellectuals who would find it unthinkable to sneer at a beggar or someone in a wheelchair will sneer without compunction at linguistic ‘solecisms’. (Cameron, 1995: 12)

This succinctly encapsulates the pervasive tendency to comment on language use in both social and moral terms and so from the point of view of EAP, where there is arguably a greater premium on the use of language being suitably academic, it is incumbent upon teachers to help students avoid those readily available strictures and to focus on giving them control over the language. Students need to be able to manipulate language in order to show their understanding of, or be able to negotiate with/argue over content, and therefore language proficiency is as important as content knowledge.

# 7. EAP as intellectual challenge

At the root of many of the problems in EAP is the language-content dichotomy, which is not a strict dichotomy, but a hierarchised one where in institutional terms, ‘content’ is deemed more important than ‘language’. This subordinate positioning is bolstered by the assumption discussed in Section 3 above, that language proficiency is only a pre-requisite and not an ongoing process of development linked to what is being studied. Such a pre-requisite assumption applies also to writing in the disciplines, which Russell (1991) sees as beset by the ‘myth of transience’ whereby writing is deemed to be a unitary skill, learnt once and for all before moving on to other things. Zamel (1998: 253), in similar vein, talks of the ‘essentialist view of language in which language is understood to be a decontextualised skill that can be taught in isolation from the production of meaning and that must be in place in order to undertake intellectual work’. This comment resulted from the following response from one of her faculty informants, who talks of students not receiving ‘adequate English instruction to complete the required essay texts and papers in my classes. These students may have adequate intelligence to do well in the courses, but their language skills result in low grades’ (Zamel, 1998: 252). A disembodied proficiency score as an entrance criterion, which is often the same for both undergraduates and postgraduates, and the assumptions that go along with it that language is a finite object or capacity, helps to maintain the conceptualisation of language work as intellectually empty. The dominant discourse within EAP itself, which focuses around skills, further helps to maintain this conceptualisation.

The issue of the extent to which EAP work is seen as challenging has been raised before in the literature. For example, in their comparative study of writing experiences in the EAP writing class as opposed to writing in the disciplines, Leki and Carson (1997) found that one of the factors missing in the EAP writing class was that of ‘intellectual challenge.’ More pro-actively, in her promotion of a ‘critical EAP’ which ‘positions EAP teachers as active intellectuals whose curricular goals extend beyond merely propping up content courses’, Benesch (2001: 84) makes a robust case for the intellectual commitment of EAP teachers rubbing off on their students. As she puts it: ‘I have not come across recommendations in the literature that EAP teachers find one area of study that interests them and promote that topic as an object of inquiry even though their intellectual engagement could be a great stimulus for students.’ (Benesch, 2001: 84). In her case, it was her commitment to feminist issues and to making female anorexia an important part of the EAP/Psychology course she was part of, which she felt not only made up for a lack in the psychology course as currently constituted, but motivated her students through her own commitment to and enthusiasm for the topic.

Such content may therefore be ‘borrowed’, as it were, from the course programmes that students are going onto, or are already studying, or as in Benesch’s case, may derive from the intellectual interests of the EAP lecturers themselves. I would suggest that it is essential that an EAP practitioner gains some familiarity with at least one other disciplinary or interdisciplinary area. Which area would depend on the local circumstances of their work: the point is that whatever the ‘content’ background, language can be the foreground, and the focus on language is more committed when the content is intellectually stimulating. For example, language tutors can supplement attending lectures and providing feedback by reading a book or books on the course reading list and developing tasks around excerpts. Arguably, there is too much fear and trepidation in EAP discourse around treading on other people’s territory, as it were. Spack’s (1998) formulation, ‘how far should we go?’ seems to epitomise this, although I would support her general argument championing the expertise of language teaching itself.

A greater focus on the language of intellectually challenging content does not mean that we teach content in the same way that a specialist in its background discipline might. Background reading for an independent EAP seminar could be similar to that for a sociology seminar for example, but the seminar treatment would be different. It is most unlikely that a sociology seminar would focus specifically on the language used in any text. However, in the EAP seminar, an in-depth focus on the material embodiment of the text, i.e. the vocabulary, the grammar, and the rhetorical organisation, would be an important focus for students. Understanding the language thoroughly, as well as why it has been used in the way it has been used, heightens understanding of the ways of thinking of a discipline. For example, an in-depth look at one excerpt from a book can act as a metonym for the whole book. It gives students an insight into the kinds of vocabulary chosen for the arguments relating to the particular subject matter, as well as the opportunity to look at more structural features, such as how a cause and effect argument is made, or how claims are hedged. This kind of metalinguistic analysis, also advocated by Johns (1997), can be supplemented by exercise types which require students to use and manipulate actual expressions and constructions. CLoze tasks on already-analysed passages are a good way of reinforcing specific vocabulary items and collocations. They also appeal to the memorisation strategies which many students are used to, as well as making them meaningful by contextualising them in discourse. Making students aware of just what a difference a choice of word or word class can make can be implemented by exercises which require such manipulative changes. These might include linking the verb or noun with the right preposition, or following through a change in the overall structure of a sentence from a change of expression. Examples for such manipulation can come from students’ own texts, as well as from extracts they have studied. Where access to academic corpora is possible, the corpora may also be used to isolate specific features and to create exercises. A more concrete manipulation of the linguistic materiality without which the ‘content’ would not exist can have a more lasting effect, and more importantly give the student a greater degree of choice over linguistic expression in English.

Coverage of a specific topic in a language class treatment is unlikely to be as wide as in a sociology course, or a media course, or whatever, but topics chosen should be coherent. They should be broad enough in scope to sustain conceptual consistency, but also offer the opportunity for a range of texts by different authors to be studied and key ideas to be reiterated. A topic or theme such as ‘the legacy of the European Enlightenment’ or ‘postmodernity’ appeals to a range of different programme areas, but is also specific enough to provide genuine critical engagement.

# 8. EAP: Beyond the communicative approach

The need for detailed attention to the materiality of language use has been somewhat eclipsed by the success of the communicative approach. This has led to a widespread degree of tentativeness in the research literature over paying attention to language detail. In their study of PhD students, Casanave and Hubbard (1992) for example, acknowledge the fact that writing quality might affect faculty opinion, but their assertion is so hedged as to convey reluctance of the fact rather than promote rigorous attention to it. They state: ‘we should probably not be too hasty to eliminate concern for local language problems from our graduate writing classes’ (Casanave & Hubbard, 1992: 4). A need for greater attention to language was highlighted also by Grundy (1993) whose study led him to suggest that ‘research students should be privileging English language work over academic subject work and that even their modest confidence in their level of language competence may be misplaced’ (Grundy, 1993: 32).

In her well-known example of a student who was playing off the language tutor against the ‘subject’ tutor, Johns (1988) has questioned whether the insistence on the endings on nouns and verbs in the language class are in fact necessary transferable skills, or whether more useful transferable skills should be researched. The student said:

This was written for Dr Oades. I put endings on verbs and nouns for you, but he gives me a B without them. (Johns, 1988: 57)

While on the one hand, we could say that the student in this example was cleverly writing for her/his audience, and manipulating the language accordingly, did Dr Oades really want to have noun and verb endings left off? Might the student have achieved an ‘A’ if the grammar had been flawless, if all subjects and verbs aligned? Presumably Dr Oades could afford to give the student a B because the grammatical mistakes were not so intrusive that he could not determine whether or not the student had understood the issues or had done the required work for the assignment, and so on. The language tutor, by contrast, could not give a B unless the noun and verb endings were in place, and arguably this stricture is providing the student with more widely relevant ‘transferable skills’.

In the context of performance in academic discourse, I am arguing that language form, as well as language as used in a particular theoretical discourse, are equally important. In this respect I’d like to take issue with the notion of ‘surface’ or ‘superficial’ features of language. The formulation ‘surface’ suggests ‘unimportant’. The formulation is probably a result of the rejection of focus on form for its own sake which underlies the shift to communicative language teaching, but it underestimates the extent to which students need to be able to manipulate different constructions, widen their lexical and collocational repertoire, develop a wider sensitivity to nuancing through language use, and structure an argument in order to enhance their academic performance, and their academic voice in the wider community.

The rejection of a focus on form may have contributed to what Delpit (1998) has referred to as ‘the sense of paralysis and powerlessness’ (p. 207), affecting teachers of literacy because such a focus is perceived to be alien to the home cultures of their students. While Delpit is not primarily concerned with academic literacy, the same issue can apply in the academic context. She makes a powerful case for dispelling this paralysis and re-focussing on giving students the opportunity to do things with and through language that they would not otherwise be able to do if they did not also have access to ‘mainstream’ literacy in some cases, or ‘academic literacy’ in the university context. We may or may not be empowering our students to greater things after they have worked with us, but if they can work with English in the way that they want to without drawing attention to a grammatical error here, or ambiguous syntax there, both of which can lead to complete deictic disorientation for the reader, then we are acting politically in the way that Gee (in the L1 context ) suggests is the contemporary role of the English teacher. He states:

The English teacher can cooperate in her own marginalisation by seeing herself as ‘a language teacher’ with no connection to social and political issues. Or she can accept the paradox of literacy as a form of interethnic communication which often involves conflicts of values and identities, and accept her role as one who socialises students into a world view that, given its power here and abroad, must be viewed critically, comparatively, and with a constant sense of the possibilities for change. Like it or not, the English teacher stands at the very heart of the most crucial educational, cultural and political issues of our time. (Gee, 1990: 68)

The post-colonial theorist Ashcroft (2001: 58) talks of the concern for proper speech as a classic demonstration of cultural hegemony, but also points to the ambivalence of hegemony, and states that ‘mastering the master’s language has been a key strategy of self empowerment in all post-colonial societies’. He also asserts that ‘proficiency in the language does not exclude the capacity to use it in a way that localizes it’ (Ashcroft, 2001: 57). He cites the case of the Trinidadian independence leader, Eric Williams, who used his flair for language to expose the nature of imperial history in its treatment of the West Indies. This, as Ashcroft says, is a key ‘interpolation’ of global knowledge. Interpolation of oppressed or silenced discourses and experiences can perhaps best be achieved through a consummate proficiency in dominant forms of the language. We language teachers should not therefore be afraid of inculcating language proficiency.

There is a need for a much more robust conceptualisation of language work, particularly in the university context, and EAP needs to reconsider its current emphasis on communicability at the expense of accuracy and precision. After all, these are precisely values that typify academic discourse. Nor are communicability and accuracy in conflict. Accurate language use, especially in written language, is part of the academic message. The instrumental view of language in EAP needs to be adjusted, the constitutive importance of language in the academic context better recognised, and the intellectual labour of language work promoted for what it is.

# References

Ashcroft, B. (2001). Post-colonial transformation. London and New York: Routledge.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The Apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13(1), 23–34.   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes: Theory politics, and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Brumfit, C. (1984). Communicative methodology in language teaching: The roles of fluency and accuracy. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Brumfit, C. (1985). Creativity and constraint in the language classroom. In R. Quirk, & H. Widdowson (Eds.), English in the world (pp. 148–157). Cambridge: CUP for the British Council.   
Cameron, D. (1995). Verbal hygiene. London: Routledge.   
Casanave, C. P., & Hubbard, P. (1992). The writing assignments and writing problems of doctoral students: Faculty perceptions, pedagogical issues, and needed research. English for Specific Purposes, 11(1), 33–47.   
Christofides, A. (2002). Perceptions of ‘language proficiency’ and the realities of the journey from ELT student to member of the university discourse community in Britain. Unpublished MA dissertation. Goldsmiths’ College, University of London.   
Coffey, B. (1984). ESP: English for specific purposes [State of the art article]. Language Teaching, 22(2), 23–86.   
Delpit, L. (1998). The politics of teaching literate discourse. In V. Zamel, & R. Spack (Eds.), Negotiating academic literacies: Teaching and learning across languages and cultures (pp. 207–218). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Dhaif, H. (1985). Commentator 1 on Swales ‘ESP -The heart or the matter of the end of the affair?’. In R. Quirk, & H. Widdowson (Eds.), English in the world (pp. 224–225). Cambridge: CUP for the British Council.   
Dudley-Evans, T., & St John, M. J. (1998). Developments in English for specific purposes: A multi-disciplinary approach. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (2001). Research perspectives on English for academic purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Gee, J. P. (1990). Social linguistics and literacies: Ideology in discourses. London, New York, Philadelphia: Falmer Press.   
Grundy, P. (1993). Student and supervisor perceptions of the role of English in academic success. In G. Blue (Ed.), Language learning and success: Studying through English. Macmillan: Modern English Publications in association with the British Council.   
Hartill, J. (1997). Assessing postgraduates in the real world. In G. Blue, J. Milton, & J. Saville (Eds.), Assessing English for academic purposes (pp. 117–130). Oxford: Peter Lang.   
Horowitz, D. (1986). What professors actually require: Academic tasks for the ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 20(3), 445–462.   
Johns, A. (1988). The discourse communities dilemma: Identifying transferable skills for the academic milieu. English for Specific Purposes, 7(1), 55–60 (Discussions and Research Notes Section).   
Johns, A. (1997). Text, role, and context: Developing academic literacies. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Leki, I., & Carson, J. (1997). ‘Completely different worlds’: EAP and the writing experiences of ESL students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly, 31(1), 39–69.   
Robinson, P. (1980). English for specific purposes. London: Pergamon Press.   
Russell, D. (1991). Writing in the academic disciplines, 1870–1990: A curricular history. Carbondale: Southern Illinois Press.   
Spack, R. (1998). Initiating students into the academic discourse community: How far should we go?. In V. Zamel, & R. Spack (Eds.), Negotiating academic literacies: Teaching and learning across languages and cultures (pp. 85–104). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Strevens, P. (1988). ESP after 20 years. In M. Tickoo (Ed.), ESP: State of the Art Anthology Series 21. Singapore: SEAMEO Regional Language Centre.   
Swales, J. (1985). ESP: The heart of the matter or the end of the affair?. In R. Quirk, & H. Widdowson (Eds.), English in the world (pp. 212–223). Cambridge: CUP for the British Council.   
Swales, J. (1988). Episodes in ESP: A source and reference book on the development of English for science and technology (2nd edn). Hemel Hempstead: Prentice Hall International.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Thompson, I. (1987). Japanese speakers (includes broad similarities with Korean). In M. Swan, & B. Smith (Eds.), Learner English (pp. 212–223). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Turner, J. (1999). Academic literacy and the discourse of transparency. In C. Jones, J. Turner, & B. Street (Eds.), Students writing in the university: Cultural and epistemological issues (pp. 149–160). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Turner, J. (1999). Problematising the language problem. In H. Bool, & P. Luford (Eds.), Academic standards and expectations: The role of EAP (pp. 59–66). Nottingham: Nottingham University Press.   
Zamel, V. (1998). Strangers in academia: The experience of faculty and ESL students across the curriculum. In V. Zamel, & R. Spack (Eds.), Negotiating academic literacies. Teaching and learning across languages and cultures (pp. 249–264). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.

Joan Turner is Head of the Language Unit at Goldsmiths College, University of London, and a Senior Lecturer. She has written a book on study skills for SAGE (2002), and published on EAP, academic literacy, conceptual metaphor, and cross-cultural pragmatics.