# English medium instruction lecturer training programmes: Content, delivery, ways forward

Katrien L.B. Deroey

Universite du Luxembourg, Campus Belval, Maison du Savoir, 2, avenue de l'Universite, L-4365, Esch-sur-Alzette, G.D, Luxembourg

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
English medium instruction (EMI)   
Lecturer training   
Professional development   
Course design

This paper surveys English medium instruction (EMI) lecturer training worldwide in order to inform decisions by practitioners tasked with its design and delivery. The survey encompasses 25 articles which included information about EMI lecturer training and support initiatives in 18 countries. These were analysed for their content components and delivery methods as well as training challenges and recommendations. This analysis revealed four main components: language, communication, pedagogy and EMI awareness. Most programmes were delivered face to face but some were blended with a substantial amount of online and independent work. Delivery methods could broadly be classified into group classes, individual support and peer learning. Microteaching with reflection, feedback and observation was a widely recurring and highly rated activity. Programmes were typically developed in-house by English language professionals. Recurring challenges were contextualisation, group heterogeneity, lecturer confidence and the lack of incentivisation. The paper concludes with pedagogical recommendations for the development of EMI lecturer training programmes and an EMI lecturer training framework.

# 1. Introduction

The worldwide spread of English as a medium of instruction (EMI) in higher education is increasingly generating initiatives to support EMI lecturers. English language practitioners are ofen tasked with this support, as the main training target i commonly (intill) identified as language. However, designing and delivering EMI lecturer training is a complex endeavour. On the one hand it requires consideration of the varied linguistc, educational, cultural and institutional contexts that characterise EMI settings. On the other hand, we need to consider afective factors such as confidence, attitudes towards MI and motivation, as well as practical issues such as resources and lecturers ailability. Additionall, individual neds will vary with, for instance, lecturers' English language proficiency, disciplinary affiliation, (M teaching experience and pror techer training in ther firs languag Practtioners charged with developing EMI training programmes could therefore benefit from knowing how others have approached such training and what their experiences were.

A few overviews of EMI lecturer training exist, notably Costa (2015), O'Dowd (2018) and Jimenez-Munoz (2020). Costa (2015) used internet course pages and responses to a CLIL (Content and Language Integrated Learning) email goup to gain a picture of EMI training initiatives in 10 European countries. The resulting patchy (p. 130) picture revealed programmes largely focused on language and pedagogical training. Language training covered 'comprehensible input, communication and presentation skils, intonation, pronunciation, prosody, fluency, lexical accuracy, use of questions, register, cohesion and coherence (p. 134). Pedagogical training covered giving fedback to students, helping students with notetaking, preparing exams, materials design, intercultural skill, use of humour, asides, signposting, role-playing of ecture, ob shadowing and related feedback, knowledge of EMI/ICLHE underpinnings, classroom management, [and] use of ICT (p. 134). Training is delivered through round tables, lunchtime conversations, language advisory sesions and coaching sessons' (p. 134). ODowd (2018) administered a survey to representatives of 70 European universities in 11 countries. He found that EMI traning chefly targeted communication kills and was very eclectic (p. 562). He advocates a more consistent approach that includes CLIL methodology. Jimenez-Munoz (2020) obtained questionnaire responses from 144 adminis trators charged with EMI provision at 21 international universities. Additionally, 162 lecturers at Spanish institutions scored EMI-related can-do' teaching statements in terms of their confidence and a few more experienced' lecturers were also interviewed. Findings showed training was mostly pre-service and language-oriented despite experienced EMI lecturers need for ICLHE (Integrated Content and Language in Higher Education) methodological training. The primary focus was general English proficiency with some work on presentations sils pronunciation and elocution. Theasumption was that teaching skills would easil transfer to EMI, which meant that EMI cognitive and learning requirements' as well as lecturer shortcomings' were overlooked (p. 126). On the whole, programmes were inconsistent and light-touch' (p. 126), prompting the conclusion that HE institutions seem to have been more worried about seting these [EMI] programmes in motion with a modicum of quality-assurance measures than establishing further training so as to aim for excellence in both EMI teaching and learning' (p. 132). He therefore advocates continuing professional development integrating pedagogy, language and ICT tools.

The picture emerging from these overviews is that EMI training programmes are generally unprincipled and language-oriented. These three studies chiefly aimed to gain a picture of the overall tate of EMI training and lecturers' perceptions through internet searches, questionnaires and interviews of university administrators and lecturers. The current study, however, uses published acounts of EMI training written by trainers that have been mined for details about their content, delivery,challenges and recommendations. This results in a more detailed pedagogical summary aimed at helping those tasked with designing and delivering EMI training to make informed, principled decisions. The paper concludes with pedagogical recommendations that suggest ways forward in EMI training.

# 2. Survey methodology

The survey comprises 25 articles which included information about EMI lecturer training and support initiatives in 18 countries globally: Belgium, Brazil, China, Croatia, Denmark, inland, France, Italy, Japan, Portugal, Russa, Spain, Sweden, Taiwan, The Netherlands, and the UK.

Relevant publications were found in three ways: (1) the author's knowledge of artices on the topic and their references; (2) Google Scholar searches with th terms EMI' or English medium instruction' on the one hand and terms referring to professional devel. opment, training' or support' for teachers/lecturers on the other; and (3) a cited by' and related articles search from artices retrieved through the first two methods. Only papers that provided pedagogical details about the design and deliery of implemented programmes were retained. These were read in their entirety and analysed to establish what was trained, how it was trained and what the authors/trainers reported as challenges, successes and recommendations. The appendix summarises their main details

On the whole, programme descriptions were rather limited. The most detailed descriptions can be found in Hartl (2020), Martinez and Fernandes (2020), Morel et al. (2022), Long (2017) and Volchenkova et al. (2022). The limited detail is lagely due to many papers fousing n an ast f leturer trnng, r hving adiol) foi such as  lctrrs atitue, ne and difficulties, nd evaluations of implemente intiatives. The usefulnes of the current survey lies in bringing together ths catered information so that busy EAP practitioners/trainers have an overview to help them with the eficient design and implementation of such programmes. It will nevertheles be appreciated that a significant limitation of this datacollction approach is that many (if not most) EMI lecturer training programmes are not published. Comprehensive searches of universty websites (cf. Costa, 2015) and surveys of university administrators (cf. Jimenez-Munoz, 2020) would undoubtedly yield further initiatives but would have rendered this study unmanageable.

I have furthermore focused on training in EMI context, adopting Macaro's definition of EMI as ItJhe use of English to teach academic subjects (ther than English itself) in countries and jurisdictions where the first anguage fthe majority of the population is not English' (2018, p. 1). However, the term EMI' has been used quit oosely in the literature and so it is possile that few EMI training reports in fact concern CLL (ontent and Language Integrated Learning) or ICLHE Integrated Content and Language Learning in Higher Education). As the acronyms suggest, these aroaches envisage both content and language learning outcomes, which could lead to different traning foci as lecturers may be held responsible for students language outcomes (Galloway & Rose, 2021). I have nonethelessincluded a few papers (indicated in the appendix) which explicitl concern CLIL/ICLHE because they report particularly interesting training approaches that are relevant to EMI training.

# 3. Survey findings

As the appendix and this section shows, i terms of their content components, programmes broadly included work on language, pedagogy, communication and EMI awarenes. Delivery happened equally pre-and in-service and was mostly face to face, although a sizeable number of programmes were blended. The main formats were group classes, individual support and per learning. Of the various activities reporte, teaching practice stands out. Training was mostly by English language professionals and applied linguists, sometimes in collaboration with didactic, EMI or disciplinary experts. No clear regional or cultural ifferences in programme design and delivery were noticed. However, programme details were generally rather limited and comparison was also hampered by the varied training approaches and report foci. Indeed, a few papers comment on the status of professors (e.g. Long, 2017) in their educational culture and on teaching styles (e. Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Volchenkova et al., 2022). Along with regional variation in English proficiency and general lecturer training, such factors are ikely to affect taining decisions. Across the 11 years of the publications (2011-2022), thre fairly recent trends appear: online/blended delivery, multimodal communication strategies and EMI awareness. The overview which follows aims to inspire practitioners as to how they could develop EMI training rather than to provide detailed accounts of all programmes.

A few programmes conducted needs analyses to inform training content and delivery. For instance, in a pre-course questionnaire and discussion during the first session, Tuomainen (2018) asked open-ended questions to establish the types of teaching that participants did, their chief M concerns, the English skill they wanted to improve, their preferred learning methods and their main goal in taking the course. Volchenkova et al. (2022) used a questionnaire to explore lecturers (EM1) teaching experience and their ideas about the effects of EMI on teaching. A Likert scale survey further yielded data on their motivation to teach through English, self-perceived English proficiency and language dificulties confidence in thir abilit t teach in English and the perceived threats and possibilities (p. 112) of the introduction of EMI. Perez Canado (2020) performed an extensive needs analysis of 153 teachers on EMI programmes using questionnaires and semi-structured interviews in order to discover their needs regarding the theoretical underpinnings of EMI, iguisic competence, methodology, materials and resources, evaluation, ongoing professional development and mobility (p.1). With a view to designing a tailored programme for a specific department, Borstto and Schug (2016) kept a log of the support during their help desk. Despite the usefulness of such needs analyses, it should nevertheless be borne in mind that perceived needs (or the absence thereof) do not always correspond to ctual neds. n fact, i appears especiall common for lecturers to start EMI training with a view to improving their language skill, only to realise the need for pedagogical (retraining during the programme (e.g. Hartle, 2020; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017).

Before surveying content and delivery, it is also worth mentioning some recurring challenges. First, training tends to happen on a voluntary basis andnot usuall inentivised through - for instance - a financial bonus, workload reduction, peformance appraisals and promotion opportunities accreditation or certification (Borsetto & Schug, 2016; Chen & Peng, 2019; Tuomainen, 2018; Valcke & Romero Alfaro, 2016). In addition, some lecturers do not see the need for EMI training and many have substantial workloads which include an (incentivised) reearch component. Allthese factors may go some way towards explaining reported isues with scheduling, uptake, attendance, task completion and requests for research-related language support. Second, participant groups are often heterogeneous in terms of English proficiency, disciplinary affliation and (EMI) teaching experience (see 3.2.2.1, Group classes). This naturally makes it ifficult to set and achieve leaning outcomes and to contextualis traning. Finll, as Long (2017, p. 316) remarks it is evident that no single pedagogical course can satisy all HE teaching ontexts anddisciplines likely making adequately tailored courses' the lynchpin for successul EMI teacher education (Perez Canado, 2020, p. 20). To this end, Perez-Canado advocates needs analysis and validated' post-course surveys that demonstrate training impact and suggest improvements. However, designing and delivering such support is a resource-intensive task that requires specific expertise.

# 3.1. Content

Most programmes involve a substantial amount of language and pedagogical work; some further provide specific communication training and EMI awareness rasing. This multi-faceted composition is not surprising, since teaching and learning activity in internationalised higher education [.. requires] acombination of didactic, linguistic and intercultural skils for the delivery of their disciplinary content' (Haines, 2017, p. 39).

# 3.1.1. Language

Language is an important part of most initiatives and some have it as their main focus (Borsetto & Schug, 2016; Drljaca Margic Vodopija-Krstanovic, 2018; McCarty, 2019; Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011). This is not surprising as even lecturers with adequate English for other purposes such as research do not necessrily have adequate English language sils for teaching (Guarda & Helm, 2017; Hahl et al., 2016; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Tsui, 2018). Also, lecturers are reported to expect and value language work. making it auseful gateway to pedagogical traning, the need for which they may be less aware of or more resistant to Hartle, 2020; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Volchenkova et al., 2022). However,stting and achieving language goals is complicated. On the one hand, this is due to the typical linguistic and disciplinary heterogeneity of the target audience (see 3.2.2.1, Group clases) and the limited duration of programmes. On the other hand - and more fundamentally - EMI teaching competence is extremely dificult to define in linguistc terms - and therefore dificult to monitor, train, and/or certify (Gustasson, 2020, p. 1072), so [capturing the relevant EMI competence as linguistic units that can be taught in teacher training programs is [..] a challenge' (p. 1071).

3.1.1.1. Promoting confidence by avoiding a remedial language approach. The relationship between language skill and EMI confidence is highlighted in several papers. As Westbrook and Henriksen (2011 p. 189) stress it is of vital importance not to overlook or underestimate the role of affctive factors when non-native university lecturers switch to an English-medium teaching situation'. Lecturers may experiencea self-limting lack f confidence in English skill (Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017, p. 299), even if not warranted (Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011). Indeed, (self-)perceived language diffculties may affect their sense of identity (Dafouz, 2018), professional authority (Volchenkova et al., 2022) and selfefficacy (Tsui, 2018). Highlighting thedisciplinary expertise that lecturers bring to their EMI teaching rather than focusing on language deficiencies may thus boot confidence (Martinez & Fernandes, 2020; Tsui, 2018).

Several papers furthermore advocate an English as a Lingua Franca (ELF) approach targeting the effective use of English for teaching instead of a remedial approach targeting accuracy with the native' speaker as the norm. For example, Westbrook and Henriksen (2011, p. 209) warn that a near-native model highlighting error hotspots could accentuate unrealistic self-images and negative expectations harboured by teachers who are actually coping wellin English. Similarly, Guarda and Helm (2017, p. 15) found that the psychological barriers' of speaking accurate English were reduced by emphasising efective communication and raising awareness of ELF variety. As Pageze and Lasagabaster (2017) arge, awareness ofthe nature of EF can also shift teacher identit from being a model of linguistic perfection to a facilitator and manager of a classroom situation' $\left( \mathtt { p } 3 0 8 \right)$ , 'moving away from framing EMI as a language problem to framing it as a specific disciplinary communication context' (p. 307). Thus, athough language gains may be limited or difficult to measure,affective gains may create a greater willingnessto teach in English and to do so in astudent-centred, interactive way (Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Volchenkova et al., 2022; Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011).

3.1.1.2. Language skills. General language work happens especially with lecturers at or below CEFR ${ \bf B } 2 ^ { 1 }$ (independent user, upper intermediate level) and with prospective EMI lecturers. More usually however, specific language for teaching, academic and disciplinary purposes is targeted.

Speaking skills cover language for structuring the lecture, conveying content (e.g. paraphrasing, exemplifying, explaining, defining), describing visuals, interacting (e.g. asking and answering questions, fedback), managing the classroom (e.g. giving instructions) and functional language for different teaching tasks. Training is thus not restricted to monologic lecturing and presentations, whichto some extent can be scripted and supported by visuals. Importantly, lectrers also require the lingustic flexibility to respond to moments of contingency which might emerge during lectures' (Long, 2017, p. 315) and to manage diffrent types of teaching (Gstfson, 2020)  3.1.1.3, Language foci). Hence, they often look to improe their inractie fluecy and flexibilit for less rehearsed situations, including outside the classoom (e.g. ofice hours, conferences). In fact, Pageze and Lasagabaster (2017) believe that conversational classes can serve as a stepping stone to EMI training.

Writing skills for teaching, administrative and research purposes is also common. For instance, Drljaca Margic and Vodopija-Krstanovic's (2018) writing competences for EMI' module develops writing for course materials, slides and online inter. action, vocabulary, grammar, spelling, paragraph coherence and cohesion and genre-specific language. Ball and Lindsay (2013) include course outlines, email, administrative etters, abstracts and summaries. Interestingly, in one-to-one consultations, help with writing and proofreading research papers is ofen requested, even if not advertised (Borsetto & Schug, 2016; McCarty, 2019) (see 3.2.2.2, Individual support). Listening and reading training is lesscommon. Listening training happens through conversational practice (Borsetto & Schug, 2016) as wellas listening to recorded lectures (Tuomainen, 2018) and works on understanding speech in interactions with students and researchers. Detail on reading practice are not provided in the few papers that include this component (Dalziel et al., 2015; Long, 2017).

3.1.1.3. Language foci. Vocabulary is a prominent focus, arguably partly due to the relative ease with which its efect on fluency, accuracy and comprehension is perceived (Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011).It includes academic and disciplinary lexis, English morphology, colocations, synonyms (for reformulation and precision), classroom management phrases, discourse markers, signposts and adapting the level f formalit. few papers note that lecturers may already have a relatively god command of (or feel confident about) disciplinary vocabulary (Dubow & Gundermann, 2017; Gustafson, 2020; Hartle, 2020; Perez Canado, 2020; Volchenkova et al., 2022).

The functional language training described in Gustafsson (2020) is particularly noteworthy. Her teacher training in international medical education programme aimedto facilitate medical teachers effective use of ELF for discilinary teaching formats. As the basis for this training, EMI languag functions were identified for different medical teacher types (lecturer, tutor, coach, mentor) by analysing recordings of diffrent medical teaching formats as well as teacher roles, study programme curricular documents, subject-specific teaching guidelines and procedure, and likely instructional scenarios with respect to the makeup of the international student cohort (p. 1075). The recordings were analysed with the teachers so that the intended language functions could be identified. She found that the need for and realisation of functions was mainly determined by subject-specific didactics' (p. 1076). For example, clinical reasoning lectures' contained functions such as introducing a case for clinical reasoning', making reasoning visible/accessible' and facilitating students clinical reasoning (p. 1077). The resulting teaching manual contained ELF phrases for subject-specific functions and for work on phrases and stretches of discourse that appeared to be challenging for the teachers i terms of formulation in ELF and/or pedagogical efectivenes (p. 1075). This manual was then used in a pilot teacher training programme involving role-play, teaching observations, focus group discussions and individual feedback sesions. Perhaps not surprisigly, the scope of this ambitious pilot programme was eventually narrowed' down due to institutional limitations' (e.g. teachers' workload) (p. 1079).

Pronunciation is another major source of insecurity. As Ball and Lindsay (2013, p. 50) observe, concerns of pronunciation, enunciation and general comprehensibility are inevitable when a professional is required to act in a public forum, faced with an audience whose abilities in these areas may be equal or superior'.

The pronunciation foci are basic English pronunciation rules; specific English sounds; field-specific terms; Latinate words; common academic lexis; and academic, disciplinary and high frquency words that are challenging for particular L1 speakers (e.g. the for

Spanish speakers, Ball & Lindsay, 2013). Prosody training encompasses stress placement, intonation, pace and enunciation. In thir pronunciation and prosody' module, Morell e l. (2022) further include resources for autonomous practice and a discussion about what constitutes intelligible pronunciation. A focus on intelligbilit rather than a native-lkeaccent is also advocated by Henderson (2019). In her paper on the importance of pronunciation in EMI lecturer training, she argues for improving attitudes towards foreign-accented speech and raising awareness of the cognitive load of accented speech. To achieve these goals, she suggests discussions about EMI experiences, native-like speech and intelligibility, and micro-teaching feedback.

An explicit grammar focus is les usual and targets basic English grammar rules, grammatica structure and specific points related to the lecturer's L1 (e.g. overuse of the progressive aspect, Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011).

# 3.1.2. Communication strategies

Communication training is naturally intertwined with language and pedagogical work. It broadly addresses intercultural competence as well as oral and multimodal strategies to facilitate teaching and learning in multilingual and multicultural settings. Information on this training component was limited.

To promote intercultural competence, the reported work is as follows:

reflecting on culture and intercultural communicative competence and how this might affect teaching and learning in multicultural classes (e.g. Maiz-Arevalo & Orduna-Nocito, 2021);   
. analysing lecturers' experiences of cultural and communication clashes (e.g. Gustafsson, 2020; Tuomainen, 2018);   
: discussing culture-based learning styles (Gustafsson, 2020); and   
raising awarenessof intercultural transparency' (Dubow & Gundermann, 2017, p. 480) for instance regarding local references, metaphors and idioms.

Work on oral strategies includes reformulation, redundancy, signposting, and simplifying and demonstrating instructions. As regards multimodalit, Morell (2020) highlights the need to make EMI trainees aware of how visuals, writing, body language and speech combine to convey and elicit meaning' (p. 58), thus facilitating comprehension by compensating for spoken linguistic inaccuracies and complexities' (p. 69). Others point out slides should be optimised to facilitate comprehension (e.g. by reducing text) (e.g. Hartle, 2020; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018). In their recommendations for L1 English lecturers teaching students with English as an Additional Language, Aish and Tomlinson (2022) concluded handouts should have extra space and information rather than containing only the slides.

# 3.1.3. Pedagogy

Many initiatives include both language and pedagogical components. Although it has been argued that lecturers need a good command of English before they can attend to and master specific teaching strategies (Perez Canado, 2020), effective lecturing kils are not directly proportional with high linguistic proficiency (Morel, 2020, p.82) see also Dubow & Gundermann, 2017). Indeed, the common inclusion of pedagogical training in our programmes bears out Macaro et al.'s (2019) belief that pedagogical (re)training is generally warranted regardes of English proficiency. One reason for his s that many lecturers have not rceived any teacher training (Jimenez-Munoz, 2020; Long, 2017; Macaro et al, 2019; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Tsui, 2018; Volchenkova et al., 2022). Another reason is the need for alternative ways of presenting academic material to students for whom English [is] also a second language? Dearden, 2014, p. 23) in what ae often linguistically, educationally ad culturally divere classrooms. edagogical training may thus lead to a benefical shift from being preoccupied with language issues to recognising how teaching straegies can compensat for these and facilitate teaching and learning in EMI classrooms (Hartle et al., 2021). Additionally, pedagogical gains could transfer to L1 teaching (Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Volchenkova et al., 2022), so that

[a] change in the language of instruction can [..] be seen as an opportunity leading to consideration of other elements in the training of lecturers which help determine the quality of the education provided to students in international clasrooms' (Dafouz et al., 2020, p. 327).

Volchenkova et al. (2022) report that trainees considered a change in their professonal identity from an authoritative transmitter of information to a facilitator of student-centred learning (p. 117), assuming responsibility for students understanding. Tsui (2018) found that rather than a sudden change in participants' teaching behaviours, the rel training benefits were a greater understanding of their role as EMI teachers and students' perspectives on the one hand and increased confidence in applying the taught pedagogical techniques on the other. I i interesting that pedagogical training is invariably (very) positively evaluated, regardles of whether trainees expected it. In fact, some programmes evolved to work more on teaching strategies than originally anticipated (Guarda & Helm, 2017; Hartle, 2020; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018) as what first appeared to be language-related issues turned out to be at least partially attributable to teaching methodology.

3.1.3.1. Teaching stategies. Pedagogical work essentially entails promoting interactive, student-cenre teaching methods. These can compensat[e] for and suppor[t] the extra cognitive load that the second language places both on leaners and on teachers (Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017, p. 296) whilst as alleviating lecturers'] performance anxiety' as the language load is shared and managed in a learning approach based on co-construction of knowledge' (p. 306) (see also Martinez & Fernandes, 2020). However, a student-centred, interactive aproach may be far removed from culturally familiar teaching styles (e.g. Tuomainen, 2018;

Volchenkova et a. 2022) or may be found dificult because of a lack of abilit or confidence to achieve this in English (Drljaca Margic & Vodopija-Krstanovic, 2018; Perez Canado, 2020; Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011).

Work on interactive, student-centred teaching and learning strategies includes the following:

: discussion of trainees' teaching ideologies and styles (Tuomainen, 2018);   
alternative approaches such as the flipped classroom and task-based, problem-based or cooperative learning (e.g. Martinez & Fernandes, 2020; Perez Canado, 2020; Tsui, 2018);   
. classroom strategies such as checking understanding with pers, organising group work, integrating student contributions, correction and feedback, giving clear instructions, stimulating interest, lecture pre-and review activities, explicit learning objec. tives and lesson outlines, and pacing teaching (e.g. Dubow & Gundermann, 2017; Hartle 2020; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Perez Canado, 2020);   
digital tols (e.g. Mentimeter, Wikis social networks, online translators and corpora) (e.g. Arau Ribeiro et al., 2019; Morellet al., 2022; Perez Canado, 2020); and   
adapting materials, content and asessment to the EMI context (e.g. Ball& Lindsay, 2013; Hartle, 2020; Long, 2017; Martinez & Fernandes, 2020; Perez Canado, 2020; Volchenkova et al., 2022)

# 3.1.4. EMI awareness

A few programmes include EMI theory to promote a better understanding of EMI and inform attitudes towards it Perez Canado (2020, p. 20), for example, concluded lecturers in her traditionally monolingual Spanish setting were unfamiliar with the theoretical underpinnings of EMI (models, legislation, efects of bilingual study). Explaining attitudes towards EMI, Lauridsen (2015, p. 31) found that lecturer feel caught' between institutional expectations and students' needs, and vary in their willingnes to acept inter. nationalisation. et a Hre (2020, p. 1 rmarks, f E is to befftive, it should . be driven y mivateleers thmseles who wish to cater for the needs of their students in a globalized world'.

The initiatives surveyed cover the following topics (e.g. Chen & Peng, 2019; Hartle, 2020; Perez Canado, 2020; Volchenkova et al. 2022):

. what makes a good EMI lecturer;   
. EMI and how it differs from CLIL and ICLHE;   
. the role of language in content learning;   
. the benefits, challenges and myths of EMI and bilingual education; . the multicultural and multilingual classroom;   
. accents and intelligibility;   
: CEFR levels; and   
: language policy

Although not prominent i our intiatives, EMI awarenesstraining should arguably also promote an understanding of the student perspective, i.e. the challenges of learning through English (cf. Macaro et al., 2019).

# 3.2. Delivery

This section surveys the training mode, formats, activities and trainers. As the appendix shows, some initiatives target prospective (pre-service') or practising (in-service) EMI lecturers while others train both together. EMI traning is not usually integrated in a larger professional development programme.

# 3.2.1. Mode

Most programmes are delivered face-to-face. Nevertheless a few have substantial online and/or autonomous learning components (Arau Ribeiro et al., 2019; alziel et al., 2015; Hartl, 2020; Morel et al., 2022; Volchenkovaet al., 2022), potentially catering better to lecturers individual needs and work schedules. Fully online intiatives are described in Airey (2011) and Valcke and Romero Alfaro (2016). The later, however, includes a meeting of all participants at the end of the initiative, which was deemed an important motivator. A review of a few EMI training MOOcs can be found in Belyaeva (2018).

The 60-hour blended course by Arau Ribeiro et al. (2019) is exceptional in having only two face-to-face sessions. Its aim was to train lecturers to use web-based learning in CLIL teaching. Course content was put on Moodle and trainees worked online to explore applications of digitl lerning and teaching tool.Whilst this approach offere traines and trainers freedom, the authors conclude that more face-to-face time is needed for questions and to ensure task completion. They also recommend CLIL cafes and online discussion forums to reinforce the community of practice and stimulate engagement with the material, as well as teaching recordings to document progres. Dalziel et al. (2015) offered a blended course with a face-to-face component of 60 hours and 40 hours of online work. Participation in the face-to-face sessions was inconsistent due to trainees work commitments but autonomous learning was also erratic (p. 10). Hartle (2020) concludes that her 40-hour blended course targeting language and digital ools was an effective format. Online asynchronous analytical activitie, reflection and dscussion fed into fac-to-face classes;this was supplemented with individual mentoring sessions (see 3.2.2.2, Individual support).

# 3.2.2. Format

The main formats are group classes, individual support and peer learning.

3.2.2.1. Group classe. Group clasecompas courses, workshops sminars andgest lectures. Fewinstttions can)differntiate these initiative depending on English proficiency, disciplinary filiation or MI exprice. Diffentiated coures are however found in Martinez and Fernandes (2020) (language level), Ball and Lindsay (2013) (language level and EMI experience), Long (2017) (progressive course offer), Tuomainen (2018) (health sciences) and Gustafsson (2020) (medical sciences). Group heterogeneity naturally makes it dfficult to cater to the needs of all participants. Drljaca Margic and Vodopija-Krstanovic (2018) therefore recommend groups ban anagailit to faitate tting and hing laga  s wel as to aoid rusttionor d coidence due to working with peers wh ave weaker or tronger language skill. In this reard, Pere Canad (2020found anguage traning was especially needed for lecturers over 40, whom her needs analysis revealed to have lower productive skill, les mastery of disciplinay lexis and hence les confidencein teaching in English. Harte (2020) notes that mixed-discipline groups meant her coursecould not meet disciplinary needs; these were therefore addressed through individual mentoring ee 3.2.2.2, Individual upport). Another approach to discipline-specific support i ilustrated in Morell et l. (2022). Disciplinary colleagues who had previously attended EMI workshops functioned as EMI mentors whom the trainees observed and received teaching fedback from. Regarding needs and EMI experience, Morell e al. (2022) found prospective EMI teachers were more interested in improving their language, whil experienced EMI lecturers wanted to focus more on teaching methodology. Despite these challenges, mixed groups can be useful: they can stimulate reflectin through comparing experiences and practices (Hartle, 2020; Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017) and provide practice in adapting disciplinary content to different levels of knowledge (Valcke & Romero Alfaro, 2016).

In terms of scheduling, extensive group formats are six to 12 weeks, with contact hours ranging from 12 to 60 (30 on average) and sessions lasting two to thre hours. Intensive formats are the days to two weeks and are sometimes organised as rtreats or summer schools either locally (Dalziel et al., 2015; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018; Tsui, 2018) or in an English-speaking country (Dalziel et al., 2015; Herington, 2020). Two papers compare extensive and intensive training. Martinez and Fernandes (2020) ran the same on-campus course extensively (3 hours weekly for 10 weeks) and intensively (35 hours over five days). Dalziel et al's (2015) Leaning English for Academic Purposes' project offered a choice between a summer school in Italy (eight days) or Ireland (two weeks), a blended on-campus course of 100 hours, and individual language advising' sessions. Martinez and Fernandes (2020) report that participants generally preferred weekly courses during the semester and that the extensive courseallowed trainees totr out ideas and techniques that had been worked on during the EMI course meetings (p. 141). Dalziel et al. (2015) believe that one week sufices for intensive courses although two weeks may be useful if more languag work i needed. Participants in their project also sugested short workshops (from one afternoon to two days) on specific language and teaching topic. Reported advantages of the intensive format are the possbilit to organise everal courses each semester and better content retention between classes (Martinez & Fernandes, 2020). Chen and Peng (2019) further report an increase in lecturers' sense of sef-fficacy following afive-day on-campus programme. On the other hand, socialising during retreats/summer schols can create peer bonds that promote continued leaning and a sense of community (Dalzie et al., 2015; Tsui, 2018). Reported drawbacks of the intensive format are tiredness and insufficient time toconsolidate learning (Martinez & Fernandes, 2020). This echoes a inding by Drljaca Margic and Vodopija-Krstanovic (2018) about their 30-hour programme sread over 1.5 months: more time was needed to learn, integrate and practicethe material that has been taught (p. 36)

3.2.2.2. Individual support. Individual support is provided through teaching observations with feedback or through consultations/ mentoring/coaching. ypically, such support supplements a group course, where it caters to specific needs and identifies ways in which course learning can be implemented in the classroom. For instance, Lauridsen and Lauridsen's (2018) professional development programme for EMI' combined supermentoring' (two 45-minute clasroom observations with wrtten feedback on proficiency and teaching through English) with a two-day seminar retreat which partly drew its topics from the supermentoring. Participants used teaching feedback and seminar earning to set personal goals. In the nex semester they were observed again and received a progres report. The impact of the intervention was thus measured and demonstrated' (p. 9) - as institutionall required - and the programme subsequenl accredited. o ddess dsciplinary needs, Hrtl et al. (2021) offeed a mentoring sesin at three points thouhout the course. These explored language issues and helped integrate technological tools into personal teaching contexts.

A few programmes offr stand-alone individual support. For example, Westbrook and Henriksen's (2011) case study of a Danish lecturer details a tailor-made language course' based on teaching observations and feedback. An intial 40-minute interview established the lecturer's needs and English level. Subsequently, five 45-minute EMI lectures were recorded and observed. The frst observation was followed by written feedback on fluency, pronunciation, vocabulary, grammar and interaction with students' (p. 192). Oral feedback was provided for ll lecture in the shape of 45-minute language lessons' so that new knowledge and skills could be applied in subsequent lectures. Additionall, a lecture in Danish was observed for comparison. Six months later, sixth observation was followed by an interview gauging perceived gains. The language gains appeared modest despite the lecturer's initial lack of confidence in her English, there had never been any major language ssues and the lecturer commented it was difficult to simultaneously attend to language and content. Instd, the main gain was afective, .. crating a positive sense f being able to lectre with confidence in English' (p. 189). For Dalziel et al.'s (2015) language advising service' lecturers could book five 1-hour meetings with expert English teachers', preceded by a discussion and lesson observation. Lecturers were ofen interested in promoting classroom interaction and ways to ensure clarity in teaching and assessment. This service required great flexibility in adapting to trainees schedules. The authors also recommend initial support before the teaching semester because certain topics (e.g. exams) could not addressed in time. Borsetto and Schug's (2016) language support helpdesk offered consultations a the stff's departments. Lecturers looked to develop their speaking accuracy, fluency and pronunciation for teaching and presentations but also frequently requested proofreading for their articles. This interest in research-related English support was also evident in McCarty's (2019) global faculty development consultations for potential MI lecturers. Of the kinds of support advertised in the flyer, improving fluency and accuracy for academic discusions and conference presentations were the most common request. Although academic writing did not fature in the flyer, such requests were as fequent as those for teaching support. Furthermore, uptake acrostwo years remained limited despite offering this service online.

3.2.2.3. Per learning. Peer learning is a key component of most initiative, occurring through discussions as well as microteaching observations with fedback (se 3.2.3.1, Teaching practice). Per communitie of practice are usually formed during group courses and xchangea faittd houh inussion fora rey, 2011), sil medagrups . Facook,Marinz  Fnd, 2020) dedicated peer platorms (Tsui, 2018) and briefing sesions (Gustafsson, 2020). Altenatively, they are the main support method, as in Valcke and Romero Alfaro's (2016) Belgian-Spanish tandem teacher training programme, which was created to help lecturers navigate multilingual and multicultural classrooms.

Peer learning has various benefits. Per-to-peer mentorship' can help lecturers thrive in times of changing organizational structures and work environments (Simmonds & Dicks, 2018, p. 282), such as the EMI context. Lecturers can compare and co-construct diffrent pedagogical strategies based on the existing [monolingual] ones' (Hartle, 2020, p. 15) instead of an Anglo-centric pedagogy (p. 16) being imposed which may not suit the local context. Practice communitie can furthermore empower lecturers to take ownership of their learning (Gustafsson, 2020) and avoid training being perceived as a trainer-led top-down institutional imposition (Arau Ribeiro et al., 2019). Volchenkova et al. (2022) also write that some trainees reported benefiting more from peer learning and feedback than formative asessment by the trainer. Trainee questionnaires in Perez Canado (2020, p. 19) similarly revealed that sharing methodological experiences with collagues was one of the most valued aspect f the course. In addition, peer networks can yield affctive gains (Chen & Peng, 2019; Dalziel et al, 2015). Tsu (2018, p. 115), for instance, argues that [for novice teachers in particular, moral support or constructive criticisms from experienced colleagues often form a potent source of eficacy'. However, Drljaca Margic and Vodopija-Krstanovic (2018, p. 39) warn that it is essential to first create an institutional culture that promotes pr review among teachers and encourages autonomous teacher development. Peer networks may moreover be short-lived without sustained coordination.

# 3.2.3. Activities

Teaching practice is a key activity (see 3.2.3.1). Other activities include conversational practice, discussions (e.g. about EMI experiences and artices) eflection (eg. on one's teaching practice, ideology and progres), simulations (e.. office hour interactions), gap-illing exercise, analytical exeries e. aw analysis of strengths, weaknesses, oortuntie and threats for r, Martinez & Fernandes, 2020, p. 135), listening and writing exercises logboos (e.g. documenting task completion, Valcke & Romero Alfaro, 2016), proects (e.g. on an aspect of trainees EMI teaching, Bll & Lindsay, 2013), and the application of digital tols (e.g. language support tools, Morell et al., 2022; teaching tools, Arau Ribeiro et al., 2019).

3.2.3.1. Teaching practice. Teaching practice typically happens as microteaching to fellow trainees. More rarely, trainers observe lecturers in their classroom (Dubow & Gundermann, 2017; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018; Westbrook & Henriksen, 2011). In this experiential form of leaning, trainees apply ther learning, reflet on it and get feedback; they also obsere others and give feedback.

Observation f peers, experiecd M lecturers or English lecturers enables trainees t lear from thers (in)efective practices and lets them experience teaching from a student's perspective. Herington (2020) describes two pre-service courses involving observation. I one, Chinese lecturers oserved their disciplinary counterparts i the UK; in the other, Japanese lecturers observed UK lecturers from other disciplines. Before the live observations, participants watched recorded lectures ilustrating specific teaching techniques. An observation protocol with three simple prompts was used: what happened in the clas or lecture you are observing?; what was different to your own teaching stuation?; and what could you apply to your own teaching stuation? (pp. 73-74). He remarks that detailed protocols with predetermined categories are potentill more objective but they can be time-consuming to train and tend to focus on what i done instead of how it i achieved, thus biasing notions about what teaching should lok like. This echoes a point by Shortland (2010, p. 296) in a paper on peer observation in continuing professonal development. She advocates mutually understood and fit-for-purpose criteria for constructing feedback', since checklist-style forms' 'can constrain the observer into recording what the institution suggests is oserved, rather than what would benefit the person being observed'. To maximise learning transfer and contextualisation, Herington (2020) recommends matching EMI lecturers with L1 disciplinary counterparts, suficient time for pre-and post-observation discussions, and follow-up. This follow-up should involve observations at trainees intitutions, asking them to keep a reflection log and encouraging them to discus teaching with peers. On a related note, Tsui (2018, p.119) believes the efect of the Taiwanese EMI training programme she evaluated may not lie in its power to immediately change every participant's EMI practice but in its power to allow self-reflections that allow participants to transcend familia territory, thus promoting selfefficacy and continuous growth. This in line with Farrlls (2020, pp. 277-278) argument that reflction is a key competency for EMI teachers in adapting to specific social, cultural and political contexts'. Reflecting ivolves systematicll looking at what they do, how they do it, why they do it, what the outomes are in terms of student leaning, and what ctions EMI teacers wil take as a result of knowing allof this information' (p. 278). He suggests stimulating relection through discussions with fellow EMI teachers, writing (e.g. journal, forums), team-teaching with a language lecturer, action research and self-observation to confront lecturers' beliefs about their teaching with their practice.

An exceptional initiative involving observation and self-reflection to assure quality teaching and promote lecturer development is the EMI Quality Management and Asurance scheme at the University of Freiburg (Dubow and Gundermann, 2017), where whole study programmes are certified by the Language Centre and Centre for Higher Education Didactics. Afer a classroom teaching observation by anexpert using linguistic and comncative assmet criteria, the lectrer self-ases and ges fedac from the expert and students. Lecturers who are not certified' after this observation receive language and communication training through e-modules, workshops and individual coaching. This i followed by another observation and evaluation. Also using observation, reflection and feedback, Airey's (2011) online programme had participants give the same mini-lecture in their first language and in English. The video-recordings were put online and commented on by the lectrers themselves, their prs and the trainer in an online discussion forum. The online availability of the recordings stimulated extensive peer feedback.

Despite the rported usfulnessof teaching practice, several pitflls should e noted. First taching practice may be more effective for those wth sufficient nglish language sils (Ball Linday, 2013) and those who can alredy apply the insights and skills tothir EMI teaching. Second, we cannot asume that the learning demonstrated in microteaching wil transfer to real' classrooms (Chen & Peng, 2019). Third, and importantly, teaching practice requires a secure, supportive environment in which trainers consider concerns about being observed and recorded (Bradford et al., 2022; Farell, 2020; Herington, 2020; Volchenkova et al., 2022) as well as the professional and power relationships between the observers and observed (Volchenkova et al., 2022). In thi regard Shortland (2010) usefull distinguishes between observation for evaluative (quality assurance) and developmental purposes, which determines appropriate feedback and relationships.

# 3.2.4. Trainers

Those designing and delivering EMI training vary in their professional and L1 status as wel as whether they are in-house staff Ofen, they are English language practitioners (EAP, ESP, ELT) and/or aplied linguists. While language practitioners can bring valuable language teaching and pedagogical skill to EMI traning (ee Aish & Tomlinson, 2022; Galloway & Rose, 2021), hose from a general language training background may need guidance and training in EAP/ESP methodology (Galloway & Rose, 2021; Hartle, 2020). Moreover, the highly specialised and ideally multi-faceted nature of these programmes may benefit from collaborations with didactic experts (e.g. Borsett & Schug, 2016; Dubow & Gundermann, 2017), experienced EMI lecturers (e.g. Long, 2017; Morellet l., 2022), International Office staf (e.g. Long, 2017) and content experts (as noted in Dafouz, 2018; Ploettner, 2019). Since all but two courses (Gustafsson, 2020; Tuomainen, 2018) were mixed-discipline, it is perhaps not surprising that only one (Gustafsson, 2020) involved a collboration with content experts, viz. specialists in Medical Education and local EMI medical teachers (see 3.1.1.3, Language foci). Tsui (2018) writes that language training could be done by language specialists and pedagogical training by experienced content lecturers. She believes that trained EMI lcturers from the same faculty can be usefully involved in EMI training certification and mentoring, as they are familiar with the local students and educational culture. She also considers inviting experi. enced EMI lecturers from countries where English is not the L1 to provide training and modelling that is content-specific.

Trainers generally are not L1 English speakers. Apart from EMI support requiring 'a level of academic expertise' that goes far beyond native speaker checking of English (McCarty, 2019, p. 6), working with in-house trainers makes programmes more sustainable and potentially beter suited to the local context (Dalziel et al., 2015; Herington, 2020; Martinez & Fernandes, 2020.

# 4. Conclusions and pedagogical recommendations

Having surveyed 25 EMI lecturer training initiatives worldwide, the following conclusions and pedagogical recommendations present themselves. First, the content of the initiatives shows a recognition that language training alone is unlikely to equip lecturers with the sills needed in EMI settings. While ODowd's (2018) and Jimenez-Munoz (2020) finding was that pedagogical training was largely neglected, in our programmes it was very common. Language and pedagogical components were further complemented by communication training and in a few cases also awareness raising of EMI.

Second, given that EMI training is multi-faceted and some of the trained skill can be transferred to L1 teaching, it would appear logical to include i in broader continuous professonal development programmes (see also Jimenez-Munoz, 2020) that involve collaborations between language, didactic, EMI and disciplinary expert. Not only could this be more resource-efficient than separate initiatives targeting EMI or general teaching sils it could also raise the profile of EMI trining, thus attracting more participants. Since EMI is inricately inked with the internationalisation of higher education, we could furthermore consider repositioning EMI training into a broader international agenda' which adopts a more international, multilingual and multicultural vision of teaching and learning' (Dafouz, 2021, p. 34).

Third, as far as possible, training should address personal and contextual needs. As Bradford et al. (2022, p. 13) point out, [n] ational contexts, disciplinary approaches, and personal factors all have an influence on the perspectives of professors in EMI programmes. A one-size-fits-al approach is unlikely to satisfy the diverse needs of EMI professors'. As suggested by some of our author-trainers, these needs can be identified through pre- and post-training surveys, consultations, teaching observations and peer mentoring. Familiarity with research on EMI and lecture discourse can further help ensure that content and delivery match actual language use and needs in the classoom (Deroey, 2018). Just-in-time, progressve support is also desirable but something which judging by our reports has not often been possble. Local EMI policy and practice are other important contextual variables since they may affect what support is offered, what is expected from lecturers and how they perceive lecturing in English.

Fourth, we should not overook affctive factors such as lecturers' self-image, confidence, and sense of selfefficy as these can prevent them from (sucesfully) engaging in EMI. This requires a safe training environment, mastery experiences and - crucially - avoiding a remedial approach. With regard to language proficiency, for instance, it entails casting lecturers as users' rather than

perpetual learners' of English (Dafouz, 2018, p. 550).

Fifth, setting and achieving goals is complicated by heterogeneous trainee profiles and the complexity of defining what constitutes effective EMI. Nevertheless if we want trainees and institutional management to recognise the efectivenes of our programmes real life outcomes should occur and be documented. On the one hand, including teaching practice creates opportunities to apply new knowledge and skill, thus faclitating transfer to the classroom. The integration into classoom practice will however take time and thus monitoring and support beyond the training are likely useful. On the other hand, outcomes can be documented through teaching observations and post-training surveys which establish trainees impressons of their learning and its impact on teaching e.g. Pageze & Lasagabaster, 2017; Tsui, 2018). Rigorous evidence of outcomes would be useful for EMI accreditation and certification (f. Huang & Singh, 2014; Lauridsen & Lauridsen, 2018). However, objectively demonstrating outcomes requires validated instruments for measuring impact against pre-established criteria(cf. Perez Canado, 2020) which would also clearly define the competencies needed for EMI (cf. Macaro et al., 2019).

Finally and crucially as most programmes are attended on a voluntary basis, lecturers also need to be able and motivated to participate and complete tasks. This may be achieved by providing flexible, specific support (e.g. blended, autonomous and peer learning), integrating EMI training into broader continuous professional development programmes and offering institutional incentives (cf. Bradford et al., 2022; Long, 2017) and certification.

One of the most challenging but probably most worthwhile avenues for further research i establishing whether there are core EMI lecturer competencies that are internationally releant (cf. Macaro et al., 2019). Such a competency framework would conceivably not only facilitate EMI training but also allow lecturers to be internationally certified. Overviews and recommendations from existing training such as I have reported here suggest knowledge and skills we may want to train and certify. EMI lecturer and student surveys establishing needs, percetions and challenges are also already helpful i this regard. evertheles, we need more international data from EMI classroom and lecture discourse investigations to understand what constitute effctive EMI. However, even if we had an international EMI competency framework, the sills and knowledge of local trainers would remain key in adapting EMI lecturer training to suit the diverse EMI classroom and international contexts.

# 5. Towards an EMI lecturer training framework

Although contextual variables and practical considerations wil always affct decisions regarding EMI lecturer traning and certification, a basic framework can be proposed here. Based on the survey findings, we can argue for the following basic steps in the training pathway: language assessment in the target context (language training) pedagogical and communication training evaluation of outcomes (follow-up) certification.

To facilitate achieving learning outcomes, lecturers English proficiency should first be assessed, ideally in the target teaching context. If lnguage ssues are affecting communicative ffetiveness (which is likely the cae below CFR B2), a module with general and genre-specific language work seems advisable, possibly already including some communicative strategies to compensate for language deficiencies'. Subsequently or where language does not significantly impede communication, relevant pedagogical and communication skill can be trained, with or without (advanced) language work. Some groundwork on EMI awareness is also advisable, particularly where we suspect resistance to EMI or misconceptions. Training programmes can be framed as continuous professional development and preferably at least involve a collaboration between language and didactic experts.

To devise effective programmes it wil be important to construct wllinformed learning outcomes based on an understanding of the needs and context. lthough many of us will lack the resources to perform extensive or reeatd nees analyse, it is advisable to survey needs at least when designing a new programme. Individual participants' teaching and disciplinary needs can be identified through, for instance, a needs analysis questionnaire, teaching observation and/or consultation. The evaluation of outcomes should involve application in the real' classoom (for practising EMI lecturers) or mini-lectures (for prospective EMI lecturers). urthermore, to objectively as the suces of our proames and allow certification, i is esntial westablish rigrous criteria against which outcomes can be evaluated.

A blended, modular training approach can be recommended for the flexibilit it offers lecturers in choosing what and when to learn. This approach can involve various learning and support components, such as online independent learning tasks, classes, observations, coaching and peer support.

Finally, I would argue that as with any training, it is important to consider ways in which learning can be promoted beyond the programme. Organising peer support (networks, mentorships) can be useful in this regard, as can follow-up initiatives (e.g. teaching observations, surveys, periodical meetings of EMI lecturers). This would allow us to gauge long-term gains and address questions and issues as they arise.

# Author statement

The author has seen and approved the final version of the manuscript being submitted. The manuscript contains the author's original work. It hasn't received prior publication and isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to the reviewers of this paper for their insightful comments.

Appendix. The surveyed EMI training initiatives'   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Country</td><td> Programme</td><td>Delivery</td><td>Content</td><td>Required CEFR level</td></tr><tr><td>Belgium &amp; Spain Valcke and Romero Alfaro (2016)</td><td>&#x27;Online tandem teacher training&#x27; (ICLHE)</td><td>1-1 (peers) Online (7 m) + post-project meeting</td><td>- &#x27;Getting to know one another&#x27; - Reflections on teaching&#x27; - Where is English taking universities?&#x27; - Content and Language Integrated Learning&#x27; - Student goal-orientation, motivation &amp; learning&#x27;</td><td>B1-C1</td></tr><tr><td>Brazil Martinez and Fernandes (2020)</td><td>EMI teacher training course&#x27;</td><td>Ftf (1) Extensive course (35 h) (2) Intensive course (5 d) (1) &amp; (2) Pre-service</td><td>- Active and experiential learning&#x27; (1) &amp; (2) - Issues of English as a Lingua Franca and English non-nativeness&#x27; - &#x27;Effective teaching in HE&#x27; - Brazilian teaching style and associated EMI problems - Adaption of course materials - Signposting (less) important points</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>China Chen and Peng (2019)</td><td>Continuing professional development programme&#x27;</td><td>Intensive ftf course (5 d) In-service</td><td>- Microteaching - Conceptualizing EMI: EMI teaching; the role of language in content learning&#x27;; &#x27;the balance between communicative effectiveness and accuracy&#x27; - Language module&#x27;: &#x27;classroom language modification&#x27;, viz. &#x27;lexical items, explanations, intonation, discourse markers&#x27; - Pedagogical module&#x27;: EMI instructional</td><td>Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>Croatia Drljaca Margic and Vodopija-Krstanovic (2018)</td><td>Language development for EMI</td><td>Blended course (30 h) Pre- &amp; in-service</td><td>- Microteaching - Speaking competences for EMI&#x27;: interacting; negotiating meaning; general academic and discipline-specific language; signposting; microteaching - Writing competences for EMI&#x27;: course materials; slides; online interaction; vocabulary; grammar; spelling; paragraph</td><td>Various</td></tr><tr><td>Denmark Lauridsen and Lauridsen (2018)</td><td>Professional development programme for EMI&#x27;</td><td>Ftf course (2 d) &amp; 1- 1 In-service</td><td>coherence and cohesion; genre-specific language Semester 1 - Classroom observation (2  45 min) with feedback - Seminar: student-centred learning; linguistic and cultural issues in the international class- room; professional development goals</td><td>Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>Denmark Westbrook and Henriksen (2011)</td><td>&#x27;One-to-one tailor-made language course&#x27;</td><td>1-1 In-service</td><td>Semester 2 - Classroom observation - Needs analysis meeting - Lecture observation (5  45-min) with feedback - Feedback language course sessions (5)</td><td> B2</td></tr><tr><td>Finland Tuomainen (2018)</td><td>&#x27;Support for teaching in English&#x27;</td><td>Ftf course (12 h) &amp; 1-1 Pre-service</td><td>- Follow-up classroom observation - Discussions on education&#x27; - Pronunciation practice - Listening practice - Classroom language</td><td>Not stated</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="4">K.L.B. Deroey Journal of English for Academic Purposes 62 (2023) 10122</td></tr><tr><td>(continued) Country</td><td> Programme</td><td>Delivery Content</td><td>Programme strands:</td><td>Required CEFR level Various</td></tr><tr><td>France Pageze and Lasagabaster (2017)</td><td>&#x27;Teacher development initiative&#x27;</td><td>Blended course &amp; 1- 1 Pre- &amp; in-service</td><td>(1) &#x27;Support for programme design and development&#x27; (2) Rereading of materials&#x27; (3) Individual coaching (4) Lunchtime conversation sessions (5) Classroom pairing of disciplinary teachers with English teachers (6) Evaluation and follow-up of international programmes&#x27; (7) Moodle resource&#x27; (8) Teaching Academic Content through</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Germany Dubow and Gundermann (2017)</td><td>EMI Quality Management Scheme&#x27;</td><td>Blended course &amp; 1- 1 In-service</td><td>language; language issues which impact on classroom teaching&#x27;; classroom communication; pedagogy to support EMI teaching and learning; micro-teaching &#x27;EMI certification procedure&#x27; steps: - Diagnostic classroom observation with student feedback and teacher self-assessment questionnaires - Classroom observation data analysis and assessment with &#x27;expert criteria&#x27; - Individual feedback meeting&#x27;</td><td>Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>Italy Borsetto and Schug (2016)</td><td>&#x27;English support to academic staff</td><td>Ftf, 1-1 &amp; guest lectures Pre- &amp; in- service</td><td>Linguistic and communicative competencies, teaching strategies - 1-1: language support helpdesk: proofreading; rehearsing lessons; academic writing tips; pronunciation and prosody; vocabulary Guest lectures: EMI teaching issues; pronunciation; native vs non-native speakers in an international context; intercultural</td><td>Various levels</td></tr><tr><td>Italy Dalziel et al. (2015)</td><td>&#x27;Learning English for Academic Purposes&#x27; Choice of 4 initiatives (1) International summer school (Italy) (2) Summer school (Ireland) (3) &#x27;Blended EMI course&#x27; (Italy) (4) Language advising</td><td>(1) &amp; (2): ftf intensive courses (8 d &amp; 2 wk) (3): blended course (100 h) (4): 1-1 Pre- &amp; in-service</td><td>communication (1) International summer school - Teacher and student perspectives on EMI - Language and communication: pronunciation, storytelling, asking &amp; answering questions, redundancy, Englishes, presentation skills - Pedagogy: teaching styles, technology for teaching and learning, teaching practice - Social activities (2) Summer school - Language and communication: discussion practice, presentation skills, pronunciation, listening skill, reading &amp;</td><td>(1) Various (2)-(4) Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>Italy Hartle (2020) &amp; Hartle et al. (2021) (descriptions of the same course)</td><td>EMI lecturer training</td><td>Blended course (40 h) &amp; 1-1 mentoring (3 sessions) Pre- &amp;</td><td>writing practice - Teaching strategies - Social activities (3) Blended course (no details): language- focussed activities&#x27;; &#x27;methodology issues&#x27;; presentation with feedback; &#x27;international talks&#x27; (4) Language advising: discussion of individual needs; lesson observation Course: classroom management and digital tools - Language: pronunciation; specific language</td><td>Not stated</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>in-service</td><td>for L2 teaching&#x27; (lecturing and classroom management) - Materials development for L2 learners&#x27; - Managing office hours in more informal registers&#x27; - Blended learning teaching and digital tools Mentoring: further exploration of language issues and some of the technological tools introduced&#x27;</td><td>(continued on next page)</td></tr></table></body></html>

(continued)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Country</td><td> Programme</td><td>Delivery</td><td>Content</td><td>Required CEFR level</td></tr><tr><td> Italy Long (2017)</td><td>Lecturing in English&#x27;</td><td>(1) Blended extensive course (28 h); pre- &amp; in-service (2) Ftf course; in- service (3) Ftf course; in- service</td><td>(1) Rhetorical implications and language choices&#x27; - Analysis of the lecture genre - Communicative teaching strategies: visuals; multimedia; reformulation - Alternative teaching strategies: e.g. task- based learning, flipped classroom; project-based instruction; problem- solving methodologies - Language: subject-specific vocabulary, &#x27;myths regarding pronunciation&#x27;; sign- posting language - Mini-lecture</td><td>(1) C1 (requirement subsequently relaxed) (2) &amp; (3) Not stated</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>&#x27;Global faculty development for English-medium</td><td>1-1</td><td>with an academic bias&#x27;: grammatical structure, pronunciation issues, listening and reading comprehension, everyday English for academic encounters (tutorials, emails) Offer: - Teaching in English - International conference presentations</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Portugal Arau Ribeiro et al. (2019)</td><td>Teacher training for CLIL in higher education&#x27;</td><td>Blended course (60h) In-service</td><td>and publication texts - Language and communication - Pedagogical strategies (e.g. interactivity, multimodality, scaffolding learning, teaching reflections)</td><td> B1</td></tr><tr><td>Russia Volchenkova et al. (2022)</td><td>Part of a &#x27;continuing professional development programme&#x27; called Lingva&#x27;</td><td>Blended (60 h ftf, 60 h self-study) Mostly</td><td>- Understanding the CLIL approach - What EMI is&#x27; - Pedagogy of EMI&#x27; -&#x27;Alternative ways of teaching EMI&#x27; - Lecturing in EMI&#x27; - Lecturing in EMI: subskills&#x27;</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Spain Ball and Lindsay (2013)</td><td>(1) Classroom practice and English-medium pedagogy&#x27; (2) Teaching your subject in English: improving your language and teaching skills&#x27;</td><td>(1) Intensive ftf course (3 d); pre- service (2) Extensive ftf</td><td>- Microteaching (1) Presentations and pronunciation: body language, eye contact, visuals, intonation, stress, enunciation, pronunciation rules for high-frequency academic lexis, discourse markers Mini-lecture (2) As in (1) + writing emails, administrative</td><td>(1) C1 (2) Language requires improvement&#x27; (3) Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>Spain Maiz-Arevalo and Orduna-Nocito (2021)</td><td></td><td>service Ftf intensive course (1 week of 16 h) Pre-</td><td>(3) Pedagogical and methodological&#x27; issues of own EMI practice Presentation Linguistic skills&#x27; - &#x27;Interactive practices&#x27; - Academic literacies&#x27; - Interculturality&#x27;</td><td>B2</td></tr><tr><td>Spain Morell (2020)</td><td>EMI teacher training workshop with a multimodal and interactive approach&#x27;</td><td>Ftf workshops (20 h) Pre-service</td><td>- Microteaching - Verbal and non-verbal communication&#x27; - Interactive teaching methodologies&#x27; - Planning a multimodal and interactive mini- lecture&#x27;</td><td>B1-C1</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="6">(continued)</td></tr><tr><td>Country</td><td>Programme</td><td>Delivery</td><td>Content</td><td>Required CEFR level</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Spain Morell et al. (2022)</td><td rowspan="4">&#x27;Prof-teaching professional development program&#x27; 3 modules (1) Digital and linguistic</td><td rowspan="4">Blended extensive courses (1) 45 h (2) 30 h</td><td>(1) - Digital tools for EMI teachers&#x27; - Academic and specific English&#x27;</td><td rowspan="4"> B2</td></tr><tr><td>- English for the classroom&#x27;</td></tr><tr><td>- Pronunciation and prosody&#x27; All pre- &amp; in- service (2) - Personal EMI needs and challenges - Combining verbal and non-verbal modes</td></tr><tr><td>- Lecturing styles and types - Mini-lesson</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Spain Perez Canado (2020)</td><td rowspan="3"></td><td rowspan="3">Ftf course (40 h) In-</td><td>(3) - Personal course design - Peer teaching observations</td><td rowspan="3"></td></tr><tr><td>- Teaching practice and feedback - Theoretical underpinnings of bilingual education&#x27;: differences between EMI, CLIL,</td></tr><tr><td>bilingual education - Communicative language for the EMI classroom&#x27;: &#x27;real English&#x27;; classroom phrases; pronunciation, morphology, syntax; linguistic</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="4">Sweden Airey (2011)</td><td rowspan="4">&quot;Teaching in English&#x27;</td><td rowspan="4"></td><td>- Methodology: student-centred teaching (e.g. project-based learning, task-based language teaching, cooperative learning), flipped classroom techniques, digital tools, social networks for classroom use, guidelines for</td><td rowspan="4"></td></tr><tr><td>materials design and adaptation - Micro-teaching</td></tr><tr><td>- Experiences of changing their teaching language to English&#x27; Comparing participants&#x27; videoed mini-</td></tr><tr><td>lectures in L1 and English</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Taiwan Tsui (2018)</td><td rowspan="2"> EMI teacher training</td><td rowspan="2">Ftf summer course In-service</td><td>- Teaching observations &amp; feedback - Cross-cultural awareness - The role of English in CLIL</td><td rowspan="2">Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>- Flipped classrooms - English presentation skills - Class management - Case-study teaching techniques</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">The Netherlands Gustafsson (2020)</td><td rowspan="2">Teacher training in international medical education&#x27;</td><td rowspan="2">Ftf course &amp; 1-1 In- service</td><td>- Micro-lecture - Post-course performance presentation&#x27; : Language: analysis of own teaching context; role-play of specific ELF &#x27;teaching proced- ures&#x27;; subject-specific language functions and</td><td rowspan="2">Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>suitable ELF phrasing : Pedagogy: teaching observations; briefing sessions&#x27; about challenging moments&#x27; : Multicultural classroom: academic culture</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">UK (China, Japan) Herington (2020)</td><td rowspan="2">&#x27;Pre-service training&#x27;</td><td rowspan="2">Ftf intensive course (2 wk) Pre-service</td><td>differences : &#x27;Support on demand&#x27;: teaching observation for ELF use and intercultural communication (1) Course for Chinese lecturers</td><td rowspan="2">Not stated</td></tr><tr><td>- Academic language - EMI teaching methodology - Trainee observation of UK lectures (2) Course for Japanese lecturers</td></tr></table></body></html>

' Missing details mean this information was not available.

# References

de Lenguas para Fines Especificos, 22, 35-54.   
Ash o .  the i h  thn t English for Academic Purposes, 59. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101145   
Ara Ribr   ar,  01   hhr io gh  g -atr (Ed.), Teaching language and teaching literature in virtual environments (pp. 203-225). Springer.   
Ball, ., ay,  013 aaa a upor or Eish-m tion in irytio n r   cont , D. Lasagabaster & J. M. Sierra (Eds.), English-medium intruction at universitie: Global challnges (pp. 4 61). Multilingual Matters.   
Belyaeva, E. (2018). EMI M00Cs for university lcturers. Jounal of Teaching English for Specific and Academic Purposes, 6(1), 165-177.   
Borseto 016   stf    t  i ril, 50, 92. https://doi.org/10.14277/2499-1562/AnnOc-50-16-   
Bradford, , Park ., & Br  2022). Psioant i ish- nctio  at in th a ad J. J f Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 1-15.   
Chen, ., & eg, . 2019). ontiuing prosioal deeloment f  techer:  Chine se stud. Jom of ctio for Tching, 452), 219-22.   
Csta . .i        (4) 127-136.   
Dafouz, E. (2018) nlis-Medm itrction ad techer ion promes in highr cation: dgil f ad imaind deties at work. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 21(5), 540-552.   
afouz,  2) is- tion   til a r   c le Journal of English Studies, 34, 15-38. https://doi.org/10.14198/raei.2021.34.08   
afouz,  , , . 00ig ier i thf id g h   t. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 23(3), 326-339.   
Dalziel, F., Helm, F., & Guarda, M. (2015). The LEAP project: Final report.   
eden, . 014). isha  me f itio-go phmn e f /.rigihe/w entre/english-languagehigher-education/report-english-medium-instruction. (Accessed 4 April 2019). Purposes, 34, 57-67. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.03.011   
Drj i 01  i of English for Academic Purposes, 35, 31-41.   
Dubw,  &d, . 017.rtiy h instc and ncive comf tcers in is-m ntion p. Le Learning in Higher Education, 7(2), 475-487. ind Bilingualism, 23(3), 277-286   
Gaway,   02).  ntih  ir  , 1 1. /..109t/ca63   
uda,  017f s  a k   .)ti i medium instruction (pp. 167-194) (Peter Lang).   
so  r iti       i 39, 1071-1082.   
Hahl,K, Jvinen, M & Juti, 2016). omdtin toish-medm ntrction in tchr tion in Find. Intial Jol of Aplied Linguistics, 26(3), 291-310.   
Haines, K (2017) Pr intction nd the posiol dmet of t techer: erations of smgup tchg nd ning in the intte ),  eii. 3958) (Peter Lang).   
Hare   c  ti 16,1-2. Humanising Language Teaching, 23(5), 1-13.   
Hderon01 r s- ti hg io   . pq qes en langues de specialite. Cahiers de l'Apliut, 38(2), 1-17.   
Hergt    e trainee perspectives. In M. L. Carrio-Pasto (Ed.), Internationalising learning in higher education (pp. 65-82). IGI Global.   
Huang, D gh, 014Crii ie   c fsh m ti -ii Teacher Education, 42(4), 363-378.   
Jme-20 tl  r -  a  d  a Martinez (Eds.), Languages and the internationalisation of higher education (pp. 120-139). Cambridge Scholars Publishing.   
Larie 5 P r.  .) education: From theory to practice. Selected papers from the 2013 ICLHE conference (Peter Lang).   
Laride,  e. 018  ai nio n ans o t fa selent project. International Journal for Academic Development, 23(2), 98-109.   
Long, E. R. (2017). Have we got the lecturing lingo? L'Analisi Linguistica e Letteraria, 25, 311-324.   
Macaro, E. (2018). English medium instruction: Content and language in policy and practice. Oxford University Press.   
aco,    019  mti  ci  s an ti. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 30(1), 144-157.   
Maiz-Aral,  -it 021)  inl tie m:  to   n-ce tr e in higer education. Alicante Journal of English Studies, 34, 159-184. https:/doi.org/10.14198/raei.2021.34.01   
ar   h Sanchez-Perez (Ed.), IGI globalTeacher training for English-medium instruction in higher education (pp. 125-152).   
Mecaty, 1g f n   h r 09)   
Morell, T. (2020). EMI teacl training with a multimodal and interactive approach: A new horizon for LSP specialists. Language Value, 12(1), 56-87.   
orell , o-n,  ia-oret  2). Pf-ch Aish- inrctin sial prh atal, linguistic and pedagogical approach. Innovation in Language Learning and Teaching, 16(3), 1-20.   
owd,  018 g d iof tcr or h  io   t. o J Education and Bilingualism, 21(5), 553-563.   
Pag, 25, 289-310.   
r of English for Academic Purposes, 48, 1-22.   
Ploettner, J. C. (2019).  critical lok at teacher develoment for English-medium instruction. Lnguage Lening in Higher Edcatio, 9(2), 263-287.   
Shortland . 10 k    a i  io echg International, 47(3), 295-304.   
ond   .18)g  s   t .    ch Education, 7(4), 282-295.   
ui . 018c f  h   1 101128   
Tuma, . 018. i r  i  d g  10 30242.   
Valcke, J, omera  2016). ak tw  tang in ther dms for tchg in Eish  . Jae,  Kek,  rke s.), ew dri  ie publishing. net.   
Veka a02).    i c t   f e University. Series: Education, 14(2), 108-122. https://doi.org/10.14529/ped220210   
Wtrook,  ie 11 rn th sic ad afftie gs  t of hrt r-d aa os rty r   i.    . education in the era of educational globalization (pp. 188-212). Cambridge Scholars Press.