Researching EAP Practice

# Establishing an institutional EAP teacher development scheme based on BALEAP's competency framework: A critical review of the competencies

Tijen Aksit\*, Necmi Aksit

Graduate School of Education, Bilkent University, Turkey

# 1. Introduction

This Shorter Researching EAP Practice paper intends to introduce the benefits, and challenges of incorporating the BALEAP (2008) Competency Framework for Teachers of English for Academic Purposes (CFTEAP) within the context of an institutional intiative of an EAP Centre (EAPC) in a reputable English-medium higher education institution in Turkey. This paper stems from the Centres attempt to explore, and gradually integrate, the CFTEAP into its existing mechanisms with a view to enriching and further enhancing its practice, and provision of credit-bearing in-sessonal EAP courses. This paper encapsulates how the CFTEAP has informed the way the Centre has reframed its approach to competency within the context of is existing systems in general, and its interdependent institutional EAP teacher development scheme in particular.

To this end, this paper wil first briefl introduce how the BALAP interprets competency and how this relates to the way the EAPC conceptualizes it. Next, information about the context will e provided with details regarding teacher profile and areas of competency demanded by the Centre. Finally, the EAPC teacher profile and areas of competency are discussed within the context of the CFTEAP and the know-how of the Centre i order to inform immediate and wider EAP contexts of any prioritie that they may consider during a process of change.

# 1.1. Competency and competency framework

BALEAP (2008) introduced the CFTEAP to establish "a description of the core competencies of a professional EAP practitioner" interpreting competency as technical sills" and \*rofessional capabilities rought by ateacher \*to a position to fulfil its function completely" (Aitken 1999; as cited in BALEAP, 2008, p. 2), stating they are \*primarily intended to provide guidance for the professional development of les experienced teachers but i could also be used for, for example, supporting the professonal development of EAP teachers within institutions .,accreditation of individual teacher portfolo as evidence of professional achievement.,.. recruitment and selection .." (p.2). It i composed of four clusters, and a total of 11 sub-clusters: Academic practice (1. Academic contexts, 2. Discilinary difference, 3. Academic discourse, 4. Personal learning, development and autonomy) EAP students (5. Student needs, 6. Student critical thinking, 7. Student autonomy), Curiculum development (8. Syllabus and programme development, 9. Text processing and text production), and Programme implementation (10. Teaching practices, 1. Assessment practices). t provides much needed guidance for practitioners on how to failitate students acquisition of the language sils and strategies requird for studying in a further and higher education context .I (p. 3); there are, however, some concerns as to the extent to which it \*encourage[s) change and innovation (Ding & Campion, 2016, p. 56). The CFTEAP was updated in 2014 to distinguish competencies expected from novice teachers and more experienced ones within the scope of the newly developed individual EAP practitioner accreditation pathway scheme (BALEAP, 2014). However, the work described in this paper draws on the original Competency Framework (2008)

The EAPC decided to improve its existing academic systems and structures in 2007 and started making significant alterations to its practice. In 2011 after a BALEAP Biennial Conference participation, the Centre decided to explore the CFTEAP (BALEAP, 2008) in more detail but due to other institutional riorities it introduction to the teaching body did not happen before early 2015. The Centre has been using the CFTEAP in various ways since then and has had ample amount f time to reflect on its benefits and challenges. This has been an enriching and enhancing process and the outcomes of this experience sill iform the current practice. We hope this work might also inform other initiatives in other contexts similar to our own.

To begin with, the EAPC considers its existing systems and structures flexible enough to be informed by the CFTEAP, and to integrate any other set of competencies as needed. Secondly, the Centre uses the CTEAP as a growth-oriented reference point, rather than as an instrument to identify best performers. Therefore, it fosters a complementing and developmental environment rather than a competing and judgemental one. Thirdly, as the understanding, interpretation, and implementation of a competency statement may change from one context to another, the Centre notes that it i essential to consider both individual factors, and institutional priorities to give inal meaning to a competency statement, and to determine one's level of competency accordingly. Next, although each job context has different characteristics, and may demand different types, or categories of competencies, the EAPC ensures that the core areas of competency are the same irrespective of experience but allow room for questioning perspectives which might be necessary for change, improvement, and personal transformation. Both lessand more experienced teachers report that the CFTEAP gives them a concret direction. Moreover, as institutional priorities demand concurrent demonstration of diffrent kinds of competencies, the EAPC uses varied, and layered, representation of aeas of competency, but the Centre does not regard them as hierarchical in nature. Further, the EAP believes the proces of gaining competency is acelrated and enhanced when worked ollaoratively. To this end,it employs a networked approach ensuring communication and liaison among the parties concerned in order to irs identify when, and how, to deploy its resources for working towards a common goal and bringing about intended change. In addition, the EAPC considers a competency framework as an integral, and interdependent, part of its whole system, and therefore is itroduction to a whole system is expected to reult in systmic change in allther part of th systm.hfore, ay nessary alttions ned o be made in all her connected parts of the system, from recruitment to acclimatisation, and from career progression to end-of-year review. Finall, to ensure sustainability, the EAPC employs mechanisms, such as regular meetings before, during and after course implementation, classroom observations aligned with the CFTEAP, standardisation sesions for marking papers, and end-of-year review meetings to reflect on performance making references to the CFTEAP. To facilitat all these processes, the EAPC ensures all documents, from policies to procedures, from procedures to guidelines, and from course goals and student lerning outcomes for each course to task and assessment specifications, are easily accessible to all teachers online, and are updated on a regular basis.

The Centre has a strong and committed teaching body with graduate degrees, and many years of teaching experience. Still the process of adopting the CFEAP (2008), has not been short and easy one. The proces necesstated collaboration, per feedack, and a ong period of time for individual joint and explication, rflection, and reinterpretation in context during each stage from course design to development, and from implementation to evaluation. This process also indluded leadership workshops for mentors and heads focusing on instructional supervisin strategies such as classroom observation within the context of CFTEAP, conflict resolution, and how to give constructive feedback..

# 2. Context

The higher education institution where the EAPC is located is a research university with ten faculties, enrolling about 12,500 students. It is a non-profit foundation intitution, committed to high standards of English language provision through various means including but not limited to allcating resources or ffring pre-sessional and in-sessinal coursesto it students. The EPAC designs and offers nine credit-bearing in-sessional EGAP and ESAP courses to around 3700 students each semester. The EGAP courses are required to be taken by allfreshman students, and a typical classis composed of students coming several disciline of study. The EGAP courses are skill-based in nature and are designed fllowing the principles of content-based instruction (CBI), as conceptualised by Stoller and Grabe (1997) with an explicit emphasis on critical thinking sklls. The ESAP courses are offered to some departments only, and they intend to further engage students with specific academic discourse.

Prior to 2007, as far as the first-year credit-bearing EGAP courses were concerned, the EAPC mainly concentrated on developing teacher-led oral and written argumentation skills and referencing skills within the context of content-based instruction (CBl) mainly implemented with aview to teaching content as an end. During that time, an institutionally developed generic teacher job description, in-house EAP teaching training sessions, and one-page geneal ffectivetaching criteriato guide classoom oservations, were used to ensure that institutional expectations were met, and to discuss performance during end-of-year review period.

Starting from 2007, it was institutionall felt that a more uniform and systematic approach, while ensuring principled flexibility, was needed for the development and implementation of the EGAP courses, in particular. To this end, the Centre formed task groups for developing and explicitlystating course design guidelines including EAP-focused program and course goals and objectives with some sample task and activity descriptions to reach them. The guidelines also included task and assessment specifications to support individual teacher's processof designing their own courses. The Centre also ensured the re-evaluation of is approach to content-based instruction, and his reultd i changing the dietion f the  from content as an end to content as a means to an end i.., giving priority to teaching EAP skill and language development; the teachers continued to design their own CBI-integrated EGAP courses around a theme of their choice, which they were knowledgeable and enthusiastic about, using the principles of CBI and following the Centre's course design guidelines. Also, the previous focus on argumentation was maintained, but to beter meet the university's strategic goals, more explicit emphasis was placed on critical thinking. ll these necesitated a transition period, and to reinforce this, the in-house training sessions were re-evaluated and re-designed to transform them into modules of an in-house certification program, and the newcomers were required to take them, but the modules were also offered to the existing teaching body who would like to refresh their knowledge and practice..

After the Centre's participation in the 2011 BALEAP Biennial Conference, and in a session focusing on observation criteria derived from the EAP Teacher Competency Framework (2008), in particular, the EAPC decided to further explore the CFTEAP to asses the extent to which it could be used in its context. However, the preliminary work required for this took much longer than anticipated amidst other institutional priorities, and its introduction to the teaching body did not happen before early 2015.

In 2015, the EAPC introduced the CFTEAP (BALEAP, 2008) to all teachers with a view to exploring if, and how, it could be used as a point of reference to further improve its EAP provision. To this end, first a serie of professional gatherings were arranged to discuss and develop a common understanding in relation to the framework, and then its relevancy to the EAPC's context was discused. All members of the Centre agreed to adopt and use the CFTEAP in principle. The clustered competency statements in the CFTEAP were found to be conducive to reframing mindsets in that the teachers were able to make more informed connections with the existing practice in the instution within the context of the framework, also realizing that as EAP teachers they were inevitably an interal part of the academic community at large. The members also agreed that any relevant part of the CFTEAP would be used to incorporate into the Centre's course design guidelie, making any modifications as necessary. These aso necessitated alterations in the module ofthe in-house 3-module EAP Certification program, classrom observation mechanisms, and end-of-year review system. Allof these processes were completed by 2018 and have been put into practice since then.

# 2.1. EAPC approach

All inall, the EAPC's flexible ystem and structures, and core competencies on the part of teachers, are currently informed by the CFTEAP. Also, constant and ongoing reflection on the impact made by all parties involved provides platform for further improving the provision of EGAP and ESAP courses in the institution. This alows room for exposing students to a multitude of academic and nonacademic texts while keeping the focus on academic skills development and language use.

# 2.1.1. EAP teacher profile

The EAPC teaching staff base is composed of newcomers (turnover rate being ten to fiteen percent of the whole population each year), existing teaching body (about sixty-five to seventy-five percent), and responsibility post holders (around fifeen to twenty percent) like teachers working as Teaching Unit Heads or Course Coordinators. There are around fifty-five full-time in-sessional teachers in the Centre, around fiftyfive percent of whom are native speakers of English. All teachers but two have a master's degree and there are five with a PhD. All teachers in the Centre ave at least a degre, or a post-graduate level certificate or diploma, in English language teaching. Teachers are not require to conduct and publish academic research, but such efforts are rewarded viathe university's merit system. eachers are also encouraged to present papers at international conferences, and they are supported in time and financial terms. They are also supported in terms of time if they pursue a postgraduate degree.

Current teacher profile of the EPAC necesstates diffrentiating areas of competency in the target context in a layered manner in terms of core, function-specific, and technical areas of competency. The core area of competency is comprised of several baseline teacher development activities from design to evaluation informed by the CFTEAP (2008). The function-specific area of competency consists of a set of teacher development activities, also informed by the CFTEAP (2008), and a number of designated roles and re sponsibilitie given to facilitate the efective functioning of the core area of competency. The technical area of competency includes institutionally required and recommended practice to further enhance the impact of core and function-specific areas of competency. Table 1 below introduces how these areas of competency are categorised by the Cenre, and what each area focuses on, with respect to teachers having diffent profiles, namely nmers, existi teching boy and eonsibility post holders i.. course oordnar curriculum & testing coordinators, teaching unit heads). For example, the core area of competency includes design, delivery, assesment and evaluation of EGAP and ESAP courses informed by the CFTEAP (2008), and the principles of content-based instruction. The function-specific area of competency is divided in five categories, each one of which concerns a diffrent group of teachers. The technical area of competency with required and optional practices concerns all teachers.

Table 1 EAPC Teacher Development Scheme informed by the CFTEAP.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Areas of Competency</td><td colspan="5">Teacher Profile</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Newcomers</td><td rowspan="2">Existing Teaching Body</td><td colspan="3">Position of Responsibility Holders</td></tr><tr><td>Course Coordinators</td><td>Curriculum &amp; Testing Coordinators</td><td>Teaching Unit Heads</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Core Design, Delivery, Asessment and Evaluation of EGAP courses considering Student nees &amp; Academic Practice [nformed by CFTEAP (2008) Integrating the Design, Delivery, Assessment and Evaluation of Content-based Instruction (CBI) into EGAP courses</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Function- specific</td><td rowspan="2">Pre-certification &amp; in- house 3-Module EAP Teaching Certification program [informed by but not confined to CFTEAP, (2008)]</td><td rowspan="2">Design, Delivery, Assessment and Evaluation of ESAP courses considering Student needs &amp; Academic Practice [informed by CFTEAP (2008)] Voluntary buddying, mentoring, and tutoring; In-house EAP Teaching</td><td>An additional responsibility specifically designed by</td><td rowspan="2">A specifically designed additional responsibility to facilitate the design and</td><td>A specifically designed additional responsibility to ensure effective</td></tr><tr><td>the university and linked to some quality assurance efforts</td><td>assessment across teaching units [informed by CFTEAP (2008) and CBI]</td><td>implementation [informed by CFTEAP (2008) and CBI]</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 2.2. Teacher development activities in the core area of competency

Currently, the teacher development activities in the EAPC core area of competency are informed by, but not confined to, CFTEAP (2008), requring al techrs, exet nwcomers, to emonstrate the relatd essential skil sets in relaio to AP, I and SAP, and to perform effectively in the given context. They are expected to concentrate on EGAP courses first and complete the related EAP certification program before they start teaching an ESAP course.

There are two major freshman courses that are to be taken by allstudents of various disciplines from enginering to art regardless of their area of study. These courses intend to develop students academic language skills within the context of EGAP, teach them how to construct sound oral and written aruments, help them develop basic research skill from finding and citing credibl sources to using such source to support their well-reasoned arguments, and to activate students' critical thinking sils. In the design and delivery of these courses, based on semester-specific guidelines provided by course coordinators, the EAPC expects each teacher to choose a theme that they are already knowledgeable and passonate about, as conceptualised by Stollr and Grabe (1997), and to develop a CBI-integrated EGAP course supported by an online learning management system (Moodle). While designing their courses, the EAPC teachers are expected to fllow the detailed course deign guidlines prepared by the Cenre, but they arealso give flexibility in terms of choosing their own themes, and academic and non-academic texs considering how these texts interact with, or relate to, each other. This makes it easier for the teachers to make informed and principled instructional decisions in order to provide guidance to their students towards reaching common academic learning objectives and program outcomes included in the guidelines. Early in the se mester students are allowed to choose any section of the course depending on the theme it offrs when/if scheduling constraints allow. The immediate impact of this core currculum policy of the universt is experienced in the form of having, for example, a class of students fom t lst four ot of ten faclties ofthe universt. When teaching the course, and secting the texts in particulr, teachers consider and highlight general academic conventions, gnres, and discourses that al students from any discpline ned to be familiar with. This, however, reduces the need to establish connection with discourse communities and subject specialists.

As for ESAP courses, there are six courses, one of which is interdisciplinary, offered to sophomore, junior or senior year students in the departments of Busines Administration, English Language and Literature, and Engineering. The EAP Centre teachers are encouraged to work with the departments that their background and/or interest would be aligned with more. The core area of competency on the part of EAPC teachers includes knowledge and understanding the dynamics of persuasive oral and written mesages, of methods in creative exposition, and of the dynamics of research reports. All of these necesstate the ability to \*work with subject spcialiss and take account fther iffet persectives .. (AP, 208). ohis end, the EAP techrs, for eample, ae expected to liaise with the subjec specialists to prepare and teach a course on research-based technical writing, and oral dissemination in order to ensure the tass in the course mimic what students are expected to do in their respective content classes in the Faculty of Engineering.

2.3. Teacher development activities, and designated roles and responsibilities in the function-specific area of competency

The teacher development activities, and desinated roles and responsibilities, in the function-specific area of competency is asumed in different capacities by teachers with different profiles (Table 1).

# 2.3.1. Newcomers: Process of certification and modules

The set of teacher development in the function-specific area of competency concerns newcomers who are given constant support through a process of certification. The process is composed of two phases. The first one i called pre-certification, during whichthe newcomers are expected to implement an existing CBI-integrated EGAP course in their first semester, lasing with a buddy and a head teacher, in order to beter understand the institutional expectations before they design their own course. During this process, the buddy, for example, provides information about the rationale behind the course, and assts during course implementation in terms of clarifying tasks and activities, and standardisatio for marking student papers. The appointed head teacher ensures the expectations in relation to the implementation of a CBI-integrated EGAP course, and theaccompanying competencies in the CFTEAP (2008) are met, e. g., 1. Academic Contexts, 10. Teaching Practices.

The second phase i composed of three modules implemented in three semesters in total. In Module 1 a course tutor provides input as to how to design a course, requiring the newcomers to structure their own CBI-integrated EGAP course, liaising with a mentor. During this proces, the participants are also required to present, ustify, evaluate and redesign the course, as necessary, based on reflectio, and mentor and per feedback. Once again, it i the responsibilit of the appointed hed teacher to ensure the expectations in relation to the design of a CBI-integrated EGAP course, and any related competencies in the CFTEAP (2008) are met e.g., 8. Syllabus and Programme Development.

Module 2 requires newcomers to implement and evaluate the course that they design; appointed unit heads monitor this proces, and ensure that all intitutional expectations, including CFTEAP related ones, are met. During this module, a course tutor provides input in relation to teacher action research, which originally started as individual teacher action research but due to time constraints turned into collborative action research conducted in pairs or groups. The participants are required to develop, and conduct, a collaborative action rearch project on an agreed problem encountered, liaising with the tuto, and a mentor, who give support during the whole proces. This provides platform for understanding how to conduct basic research, taking the participants through a serie of steps fromcollcting and analysing dat sharing and rorting reults. ll i ll aer the completion of this module participants are required to redesign their course based on reflction, and feedback from the mentor, the head teacher and students. They are also expected to present, and submit, an action research report. Some participants also present their studies at local or international conferences. It i the responsibility of the appointed head teacher to ensure that the expectations in relation to the implementation of a CBI-integrated EGAP course, and any related competencies in the CPTEAP (2008) are met, e.g,4. Personal learning, development and autonomy, 10. Teaching Practices, 11. Assessment Practices.

Module 3 requires participants to write an extended paper, reflecting critically on their own practice as EAP teachers over the previous three semesters, and the major adaptations they stil need to make in personal, instructional, and curricular terms. This process i monitored by both the course tutor, and the appointed head teacher in relation to the relevant section of the CPTEAP (2008), e.g., 4. Personal learning, development and autonomy.

# 2.3.2. Existing teaching body: Voluntary roles and responsibilities

One set f deinated roles and responsibilitie in relationtothe function-specific area f competency oncens existing teaching body in a voluntary capacity. Those interested are given the opportunity of developing buddying skills during pre-certification, or mentoring, and/or tutoring skils, during the in-house EAP Teaching Certification Program informed by the CFTEAP (2008). The ones who have not got an EAP certification are given the option of getting one as a refresher course as well.

# 2.3.3. Position of responsibility holders: Designated roles and responsibilities

Another et f deignated roles and responsibilitie related to the fuction-spcific area f competency oncers ll resonsibility post holders, namely, Course Coordinators, Currculum and Testing Coordinators, and Teaching Unit Heads. One common set of expectations common to all these parties includes having strong communication skills These positions are designed to ensure the implementation of courses across teaching units as intended. More specificall, the universty requires a course coordinator is ttached to each course offered. Some of the major responsibilitie include the following: monitoring and estimating the student workload in each course and calculating European Credit Transfer and Accumulation System (Ecrs) credits, liaising with the university; preparing course delivery guidelines taking into consideration the university's academic calendar.

As for Currculum and Testing Coordinators, they design the final assesment in freshman courses working with a various groups of teachers who form a task group each semester, following the assessment specifications, helping teachers integrate course objectives with assessment tasks, as informed by the CFTEAP (2008) e.g, 11. Asessment practices. They also ensure reliable marking of major student asessment by holding standardisation sessions, analysing the results statistcall, for example, using Rasch analysis, and sharing the reults with thetaching bod to indicat f they need to make adustments in ther asessment practie, as informed by the CFTEAP (2008).

As regards Teaching Unit Heads, they work with a group of teachers, and they mainly ensure the quality of provision, imple mentation and assessment of EAP courses, as informed by the CTEAP (2008), having regular meetigs, and providing assistance as necessary. They implement regular classroom observation cycles with pre- and post-conference meetings and carry out end-of-year review meetings, encouraging reflective practice and using the CFTEAP (2008) as frame of reference.

2.4. Institutionally required and recommended practice in the technical area of competency

Regarding the area of technical competencies, two of them are asumed by all teachers, requiring them to use a leaning management system, Moodle to guide instruction, and to provide ongoing support Teachers are also required to be competent in using the university's online student record keeping system. They are also encouraged to further integrate technology into the teaching learning process Some use blended learning platforms, such as Google Classroom, and some use digital tols to give audio and video fedback, and to use the tracking and reviewing function of Microsoft Word to give writte feedback. During emergency remote teaching times, for example during the Covid-19 pandemic in particular, some experienced members of the Centre designed, and delivered, numerous training workshops for both the members of the Centre and the whole university, preparing training materials and making them available online. All members of the Centre were expected to use Synchronous and Asynchronous Virtual Clasrooms, for example,via Zoom, for teaching, and having virtual meetings as necessary during such tough times.

The sets of functional competencies, and cross functional technical competencies in the EAPC stem from the highly regarded status of EMI in the country, the vision of the univerity, instittional police, departmental expectations, and reflection on practice over the years. They make a lot of sense in this Centre due to contextual factors, but there is no need to make them part of a common competency frmework. Stil, its multifacetd nare enriches, and ads value to practice in this context. ll types f competencies operate concurrenly, and therefore, they are intrated in nature. lso they do not sgest any hirrch but expres the need to allocate time for conceptualising and putting into practice the common principles at usually one's own pace.

# 3. Conclusion

What started as developing an institutional EAP teacher development scheme based on CFTEAP (2008) has turned into an eye. opening and truly invigorating experience, enabling the EAPC to reflect on its practice, know-how, and any main, or peripheral, institutional policies simultaneously, while enriching and transforming it EAP teacher development cheme Informed by the CFTEAP (BALEAP, 2008), the principles of CBI, the know-how of the EAPC, and the institutional policies of the higher education institution where it i located, the EAPC's EAP teacher delopment scheme is composed of a layered set of competencies, operating concurrently, increasingly enhancing the quality provision of EGAP and ESAP courses. t aims to provide the resources and plaform for collaboration to accelerate the proces of adoption but with the ultimate intention of developing citially competent practitioners. It sustainability is ensured by the established mechanisms, informing the other components of the systems and structures from recruitment to end-of-year review, but its responsive and flexible stance intends to continue to open more doors for further progress.

Institutions that would like to go through a process like this are recommended to note that changing mindsets and atitudes is an ongoing proces, and dedicated commitment and focused atention on the part of al parties concerned are essential. Also, it would be only normal to experience that aligning existing structure, making modifications to existing documents, and generating new ones in line with the CTAP may pose complexity, or ambiguity, necestating dditional clarification, time and resources. Another important point to noteis that there re diffrent levels, and ways of, aommodating change. Therefore, comparison, or competition, during the process ofreaching any projected outcome, or of any alterations one needs to make during this proces, ay impede the acceleration of processes. Thus, any foreseen chllenges need to be communicated clearly, and the process of change must be able to accommodate unforeeen challenges including time needed to discuss expectations and interpretations, address anything complicated before, during and after the process of change, and allow room for time needed to shift perspectives at the personal and institutional level.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Tijen Aksit: Conceptualization, Data curation, Writing - original draft; Writing - review and editing. Necmi Aksit: Conceptuali. zation, Data curation, Visualization, Writing - original draft; Writing - review and editing.

# References

BALEAP. 208. me frk for hrs of Eish for c . //.g/-/2016/4/aoey framework.pdf.   
BALEAP 014). nn si dt tin sch dok h/..g/-t//2016/4EAP-chm Handbook-2014.pdf.   
Ding, A & mpin . (2016) AP cr dlment  lnd, . hw s.) Th R hdook of Eish fo dc pe (t e, p 547-559). Routledge.   
Stole,  e . (1997  achnt tio    ., e n- tie n integrating Language and content (p. 78-94). Longman. htp:/arla.umn.edu/cobaltt/modules/curriculum/stoler grabe1997/6ts.pf.