# Languaging in grammar exercises by Japanese EFL learners of differing proficiency

Wataru Suzuki \*, Nobuya Itagaki

Department of English Education, Miyagi University of Education, 149 Aza-Aoba Aramaki Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-0845, Japan

Received 10 September 2008; received in revised form 19 October 2008; accepted 29 October 2008

# Abstract

Languaging that second language (L2) learners engage in while producing and comprehending language is a major source of L2 learning [Swain, M., 2006. Languaging, agency and collaboration in advanced language proficiency. In: Byrnes, H. (Ed.), Advanced Language Learning: The Contribution of Halliday and Vygotsky. Continuun, London, pp. 95–108]. This study attempts to examine the potential interactions among the type of languaging, the type of discrete grammar exercises, and learners’ level of L2 proficiency. One hundred and 41 low-intermediate and high-intermediate Japanese learners of English were asked to reflect, in writing, on how they solved one of two grammar exercises: comprehensionoriented and production-oriented ones. Both the type of tasks completed and the level of L2 proficiency were found to be the determinants of the type of languaging. We discuss these findings in relation to theoretical and empirical issues of the roles of languaging (e.g., collaborative dialogue, metatalk, private speech) in L2 learning. Pedagogical implications of our findings are also discussed in terms of the choice of comprehension-oriented and production-oriented grammar exercises.

$^ { © }$ 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Languaging; Grammar exercise; Grammar teaching; English as a foreign language

# 1. Introduction

The concept of languaging has only recently been proposed by Swain (2006). Languaging is a form of verbalization used to mediate cognitively demanding activity. Based on sociocultural psychology, Swain (2006) defines languaging as ‘‘a dynamic, never-ending process of using language to make meaning” (p. 96). Languaging that L2 learners engage in while producing and comprehending language is a major source of L2 learning (Swain, 2006). In this paper, we explore a relationship between the type of languaging, the type of grammar exercises, and level of L2 proficiency. We analyze the amount and type of languaging produced by 141 low-intermediate and high-intermediate Japanese EFL (English as a foreign language) learners immediately after performing comprehension-oriented and production-oriented grammar exercises.

# 2. Languaging

# 2.1. Theoretical framework and empirical evidence

L2 learning is continuously mediated by verbalization, either dialogue with others (i.e., collaborative dialogue) or dialogue with the self (i.e., private speech). Collaborative dialogue is defined as ‘‘dialogue in which speakers are engaged in problem solving and knowledge building” (Swain and Lapkin, 1998, p. 102). Swain and her colleagues have examined how collaborative dialogue constitutes a source of L2 learning (e.g., Swain and Lapkin, 1998, 2000, 2001, 2002; Tocalli-Beller and Swain, 2005, 2007; Watanabe and Swain, 2007). Over the last decade, through a description of the dialogue and documentation of how it was manifested in posttest performance, SLA researchers have demonstrated that languaging in the form of collaborative dialogue mediates L2 learning (e.g., Borer, 2007; de la Colina and Garcia Mayo, 2007; Leeser, 2004; Garcia Mayo, 2002a; Storch, 2001, 2008; Suzuki, 2008). Languaging is a broader concept than collaborative dialogue as the former includes private speech, which Negueruela and Lantolf (2006, p. 86) defined as ‘‘the intentional use of overt self-directed speech to explain concepts to the self”. Although collaborative dialogue is different from private speech, its ‘‘talking-it-through” aspect (Swain and Lapkin, 2002) is similar to Negueruela and Lantolf’s definition of private speech (Swain, 2006). For the purpose of this paper, what is referred to as collaborative dialogue and private speech will be hereafter called languaging (see Swain (2006) for a detailed account of the historical development of the notion of languaging).

Suzuki and Swain (submitted for publication) review the evidence about the roles of languaging in learning from cognitive psychology and sociocultural psychology. In cognitive psychology, the languaging effect, called as self-explaining effect, has been intensively studied in non-L2 knowledge domains such as physics, biology, and mathematics (e.g., Chi et al., 1989). From a sociocultural psychology perspective, researchers have recently studied the roles of languaging in L2 learning (e.g., Negueruela, 2008; Negueruela and Lantolf, 2006; Lapkin et al., 2008; Swain et al., 2009), being of particular interest to the present article.

Negueruela (2008) asked participants to perform a languaging activity in which they were asked to explain to the self the grammatical concepts taught in class. Their languaging activities were done six times, over 16 weeks, tape-recorded by individual participants at home as part of their homework, and later transcribed and analyzed by the researcher. Although Negueruela found that development in the concepts taught was uneven, the students did perform better at the end of the course in their production (especially written production) on the formal features associated with the target concepts. He also found that participants struggled to overcome their previous rule-of-thumb-based understanding of the grammatical concepts. By the end of the semester some participants began to understand the semantic aspects of the grammatical concepts.

Swain et al. (2009) analyzed the amount and type of languaging produced by nine university students as they struggled to understand the concept of voice in French. They developed a text explaining the concept of voice in French and asked their participants to read the text aloud and then explain it. They categorized what their students explained into five languaging units: analysis, inference, re-reading, self-assessment, and paraphrase. They then divided their participants into high, middle, and low languagers based upon the number of languaging units. Via pretests, posttests, and delayed posttests, Swain et al. demonstrated that by languaging, the students came to understand the concept of voice in French, and were able to transfer what they had learned to new contexts. They also demonstrated that the high languagers self-assessed more than the middle and low languagers, whereas the middle and low languagers used re-reading more frequently than the high languagers. These findings suggest that the type of languaging plays an important role in L2 learning.

# 2.2. Rationale for the present study

Previous SLA research has greatly contributed to our understanding of the role of languaging in L2 learning in several ways. First, SLA researchers have found that the type of task and the level of L2 proficiency are major determinants of the type and amount of languaging or collaborative dialogue (e.g., Leeser, 2004; Qi and Lapkin, 2001; Storch, 2001; Watanabe and Swain, 2007). Second, languaging episodes have been categorized according to (a) the area of language (e.g., Garcia Mayo, 2002a,b), (b) degree of correctness (e.g., Shehadeh, 2003; Sullivan and Caplan, 2004), and (c) quality of languaging (Sachs and Polio, 2007; Storch, 2008; Swain et al., 2009). Third, SLA researchers have been examining the type and amount of languaging of L2 learners who are engaged in production-oriented pedagogic tasks such as dictogloss, jigsaw, and picture description (e.g., de la Colina and Garcia Mayo, 2007; Swain and Lapkin, 2000, 2001; Qi and Lapkin, 2001). Fourth, there is a greater understanding about the mediating role of the oral modes of languaging (e.g., collaborative dialogue, private speech) in L2 learning.

This study attempts to expand previous research in five ways. First, we examine the potential interactions among the type of languaging, the type of task, and the level of L2 proficiency, because a limited number of studies have focused on these interactions (e.g., Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007; Williams, 1999).

Second, we analyze languaging according to L1 lexis-oriented, L2 lexis-oriented, and grammar-oriented types, while previous studies have analyzed them according to only lexis and grammar. The differentiation between L1 and L2 lexis arises from the empirical findings of Centeno-Cortez and Jimenez Jimenez (2004): low-proficiency L2 learners are apt to resort to L1-based rather than L2-based languaging. For these two reasons, we distinguish between L1 lexis-oriented and L2 lexis-oriented languaging, both of which have been categorized as lexis in previous studies (e.g., Garcia Mayo, 2002a,b; Storch, 2001).

Third, our study investigates the roles of languaging in solving discrete/decontextualized grammar exercises, because only a few studies have explored this area (Garcia Mayo, 2002a,b; Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007). As discrete grammar exercises are considered distinct from pedagogic tasks (Ellis, 2003), this study examines the roles of languaging of L2 learners performing decontextualized grammar exercises. This is because discrete grammar exercises such as translations are intended for classroom or self-study in many EFL contexts whose first language is generally shared among students and teachers such as in Japan (Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007) and Spain (Garcia Mayo, 2002a,b). Discrete grammar exercises are believed to help learners develop and consolidate their interlanguage knowledge and skills.

Fourth, we attempt to uniquely contrast the research designs between comprehension and production grammar exercises. Differential roles of comprehending and producing language in L2 learning have been the object of intensive empirical inquiry in the current SLA literature (e.g., Erlam, 2003; Morgan-Short and Bowden, 2006; Toth, 2006). Also, languaging during and after comprehension and production is one of the ways L2 learning occurs (Swain, 2006). In this regard, it is important to examine the differential roles of languaging in language comprehension and production.

Finally, in our study, we exploit written data to gain an alternative insight about the role of languaging in L2 learning. Compared to research on oral modes of languaging, there are fewer empirical studies which examine the role of the written modes of languaging (e.g., diaries, metalinguistic journals, private writing) in L2 learning (e.g., DiCamilla and Lantolf, 1994; Roebuck, 2000; Simard, 2004; Simard et al., 2007; Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007). Written mode of languaging may have a similar cognitive function to oral mode of languaging in that languaging, oral or written, helps learners to self-regulate their L2 learning (Swain, 2006).

# 2.3. Research question

This study is concerned with learners’ languaging with regard to their target language while performing either comprehension- or production-oriented grammar exercises. To examine this, we analyze the type and amount of languaging as revealed in the written retrospective reports of Japanese EFL learners who performed these grammar exercises. The next section describes the study that investigated the following research question: is there any relationship among the type of grammar exercise, the level of L2 proficiency, and the type of languaging in response to comprehension- or production-oriented grammar exercises?

# 3. Method

# 3.1. Participants

One hundred and 41 Japanese EFL learners (73 high school and 68 university students) participated in this study. The first participant group was composed of second-year high school students who had studied English for five years. We judged the high school participants to have a low-intermediate EFL proficiency level, based on their scores on the high school entrance examination administered by their local prefectural government. The second participant group of third-year university students was judged to have a high-intermediate EFL proficiency level because they had been studying English for nine years. They also had been admitted as English Education majors based upon their higher-than-average scores on the two national university entrance examinations, which focus on grammar, vocabulary, reading, writing, listening, but not speaking. The results of the percentage of correct answers for grammar exercises (reported below) support our assumption that high school and university students are low-intermediate and high-intermediate EFL learners, respectively.1 The low-intermediate English proficiency high school student group and high-intermediate English proficiency university student group will be referred to hereafter as the low-intermediate and high-intermediate proficiency groups.

# 3.2. Discrete grammar exercises

Participants were asked to perform one of two types of decontextualized grammar exercises: (a) translation from English into Japanese or (b) translation from Japanese into English. For the former exercise (a), they were asked to translate a given English sentence into Japanese. While engaged in the translation process, participants first need to comprehend English. Therefore, translating from English into Japanese will be referred to hereafter as a comprehension-oriented grammar exercise. Participants engaged in the latter exercise (b) were asked to translate a given Japanese sentence into English. We treated these participants’ answers as the outcome of language production. Therefore, the translation from Japanese into English will be referred to hereafter as a production-oriented grammar exercise. Given that the translation theory and practice (specifically the cognitive processes involved in translation) are areas of research in their own right (Li, 2004), we are fully aware that to characterize the act of translating as a grammar exercise may risk oversimplifying the complex cognitive processes involved. We also assume that grammatical knowledge is a primary form of knowledge needed in these two translation exercises, although, we recognize, lexical, semantic, and pragmatic abilities are also involved.

Three points need to be clarified with regard to these target sentences. First, the same sentences were used for both the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises. That is, the sentences translated into English from Japanese were identical to the English sentences that participants translated into Japanese. Therefore, the qualitative and quantitative differences manifested in learner languaging should be related only to the differences between the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises. Second, these two target sentences had been pilot-tested with Japanese EFL learners from a similar population (e.g., Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007). The results indicated that the sentences were challenging enough for Japanese EFL learners to produce a reasonable amount of languaging. Finally, only two sentences were used to reveal participants’ languaging. That is, each participant was exposed to one of the two English or Japanese sentences. Therefore, the quantity of input might not be sufficient to elicit languaging.

Each of the two groups was randomly divided into two subgroups, with 32 and 36 high-intermediate group participants for the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises, respectively, and 38 and 36 low-intermediate group participants for the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises, respectively. Each participant in the four groups was asked to solve either the comprehension- or production-oriented grammar exercise. For the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises, the following two target Japanese and English sentences and correct answers were designed:

Production-oriented grammar exercises:   
Target Japanese sentence 1:   
T3hhitilJ   
Correct answer: ‘I don’t know if it will rain tomorrow.’   
Target Japanese sentence 2:   
  
Correct answer: ‘I will stay at home if it rains tomorrow.’

# 3.3. Procedures

Participants were asked to write in Japanese as fully and precisely as they could (i.e., written mode of languaging) whatever they had thought about while they were performing the exercise (e.g., what they had struggled with, how they had arrived at their eventual solution, and so on). Participants were allowed to take as much time as they wished. On average, participants took less than $2 0 \mathrm { { m i n } }$ to finish the tasks.

# 3.4. Analyses of languaging

In our analyses of learner languaging, we focused on the participants’ written retrospective reports about how they solved the exercises. We operationally defined the theoretical notion of languaging in terms of the following key terms identified in participants’ reports: L1 lexis, L2 lexis, and grammar. We assumed that the participants used these terms to indicate their explicit consideration of language in their written retrospective reports. In other words, the participants used their L1, L2, and grammatical knowledge in order to engage in languaging. Although three key terms should be distinguished from various, diverse qualities of learners’ languaging, we assumed that these simple linguistic manifestations were reliable indices of learner languaging (see Fortune, 2005).

L1 lexis-oriented languaging: Any Japanese segments (e.g., words, phrases, clauses, or sentences) in participants’ reports. These segments are either Japanese words provided in the target Japanese sentences or simple Japanese translations of English words, phrases, clauses, or sentences in the target scrambled sentences.

$L 2$ lexis-oriented languaging: Any English segments (e.g., words, phrases, clauses, or sentences) in participants’ reports.

Grammar-oriented languaging: Any grammatical terms manifested in participants’ reports. Twenty-five types of grammatical terms were identified (e.g., ‘subject,’ ‘tense,’ ‘object,’ and ‘inanimate subject’).

An example of L1 lexis-oriented, L2 lexis-oriented, and grammar-oriented languaging is ‘‘moshi $\sim$ dattara” $\mathrm { ( = i f \thinspace S V \sim ) }$ ), ‘if’, and ‘‘katei” $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \delta \pi } } } } }$ past hypothetical conditional), respectively, in the following quotation from the participant’s report: $[ = ]$ was just wondering whether the usage of ‘if’ in this context is ‘‘katei” $\underline { { \underline { { \mathbf { \delta \pi } } } } }$ past hypothetical conditional) and ‘if’ means ‘‘moshi-dattara” (if $\mathrm { S V } \sim$ ) in Japanese.

To code these data, one of the authors simply identified and counted all instances of each of the three types of keywords as indices of learners’ languaging.

# 4. Results

As a preliminary analysis, we calculated the percentages of correct answers (i.e., correctly translated) for the two participant groups and the two exercise types.3 The percentage of correct answers for the high-intermediate proficiency group (university students) was higher than that for the low-intermediate proficiency group (high school students) in both the comprehension-oriented ( $100 \%$ and $92 \%$ , respectively) and production-oriented grammar exercises $70 \%$ and $20 \%$ , respectively).

Table 1 Means and standard deviations of the number of three types of key terms used in written languaging for two types of grammar exercises and two proficiency groups $( N = 1 4 1$ ).   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Participants groups</td><td colspan="9">Type of grammar exercises</td></tr><tr><td colspan="4">Comprehension exercises</td><td colspan="4">Production exercise</td></tr><tr><td>L1 lexis</td><td>L2 lexis</td><td>Grammar</td><td>Total</td><td>L1 lexis</td><td>L2 lexis</td><td>Grammar</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Low-intermediate proficiency group</td><td>1.3 (1.8)</td><td>1.8 (1.8)</td><td>4.3 (4.1)</td><td>7.4</td><td>1.3 (1.3)</td><td>1.5 (1.8)</td><td>3.0 (2.6)</td><td>5.8</td></tr><tr><td>High-intermediate proficiency group</td><td>1.1 (1.6)</td><td>2.2 (2.0)</td><td>6.0 (4.7)</td><td>9.3</td><td>1.1 (1.5)</td><td>2.4 (2.3)</td><td>3.8 (2.3)</td><td>7.3</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: Standard deviations are given in parentheses ( ).

Table 1 presents the means and standard deviations of the three types of languaging for the two types of grammar exercises and the two proficiency groups.4 An ANOVA on the means of the three types of languaging produced the main effects of the type of exercise $( F [ 1 , 4 2 3 ] = 6 . 0 $ , $p < 0 . 0 5$ ), the level of L2 proficiency ( $F$ $[ 1 , 4 2 3 ] = 4 . 9 , p < 0 . 0 5 )$ , and the type of languaging $( F [ 2 , 4 2 3 ] = 5 7 . 6 $ , $p < 0 . 0 5 )$ . More importantly, there were the two significant interaction effects: (a) between the type of task and the type of languaging $( F [ 2 , 4 2 3 ] = 5 . 3 { } _ { \ }$ , $p < 0 . 0 5 )$ , and (b) between the level of L2 proficiency and the type of languaging $( F [ 2 , 4 2 3 ] = 3 . 0 $ , $p < 0 . 0 5 )$ . A series of Bonferroni post hoc tests on the differences between every pair of the two types of exercises and the three types of languaging showed that only the difference between the comprehension- and production-oriented exercises in grammar-based languaging was statistically significant.

# 5. Discussion

# 5.1. Type of exercise and type of languaging

Our research question concerns the relationship between the type of exercise and the type of learner languaging following grammar exercises. According to Table 1, both low-intermediate and high-intermediate proficiency groups engaged in more grammar-oriented languaging in response to the grammar exercises which were comprehension-oriented compared to production-oriented. However, the type of exercise (comprehension and production) was not a major determinant of the amount of L1 lexis-oriented and L2 lexis-oriented languaging for both L2 proficiency levels. These findings suggest differential effects of the type of exercise on the type of languaging.

These findings relate to previous SLA research in two ways. First, we found that the type of languaging was dependent on the type of exercise completed. This finding is consistent with Garcia Mayo (2002a,b) who demonstrated that the type of languaging (i.e., metatalk) was affected by the type of tasks L2 learners performed (see also de la Colina and Garcia Mayo, 2007; Storch, 2001; Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007; Swain and Lapkin, 2001). In her study, Garcia Mayo (2002a,b) investigated languaging of EFL students who collaboratively performed grammar tasks (e.g., multiple choice, cloze, text reconstruction). She found that different grammar tasks elicited a different amount of languaging on the use of language. Therefore, more research is needed in order to examine how L2 learners language while performing different discrete grammar exercises.

Second, we found that the level of L2 proficiency did not play an important role in determining the association between the type of exercise and the type of languaging (L1 lexis-oriented and L2 lexis-oriented). Because the participants in this study were explicitly directed to write their reflections in Japanese (i.e., their L1), any participants, regardless of L2 proficiency, would use the L1 for the languaging activity. The finding is consistent with Cumming’s (1990) study, which indicates that L2 proficiency was not associated with the metalinguistic thinking while composing in an L2. However, this result seems to contrast with the research findings showing that lower proficiency L2 learners are more likely to resort to L1 lexis-oriented languaging than higher proficiency L2 learners (e.g., Centeno-Cortez and Jimenez Jimenez, 2004).

These results imply that L2 teachers should be careful about choosing grammar exercises according to what kind of languaging they want L2 learners to undertake. Comprehension-oriented exercises would be preferable to production-oriented exercises, in order to encourage L2 learners to produce grammar-oriented languaging. Concerning L1 lexis-oriented and L2 lexis-oriented languaging, there may not be a big difference between the comprehension- and production-oriented grammar exercises. In short, L2 learners can language about grammar to a reasonable extent depending on the type of exercise they undertake, and they also can language about their L1 and L2 to a lesser extent immediately following both types of exercises.

# 5.2. Level of L2 proficiency and type of languaging

Our research question also concerns the relationship between the level of L2 proficiency and the type of learner languaging following grammar exercises. According to Table 1, the high-intermediate proficiency learners engaged in significantly more grammar-oriented languaging than the low-intermediate proficiency learners did. In other words, compared to the high-intermediate learners, the low-intermediate learners attended less to L2 grammatical forms regardless of the type of exercise. This finding indicates that learners who are more proficient at English would language more about English grammar than learners who are less proficient. Leeser (2004) also examined the type of languaging (collaborative dialogue) of L2 Spanish learners who completed a collaborative passage reconstruction task and found that learners in lower proficiency levels produced less grammatical metatalk than those in advanced proficiency levels (see also Williams, 1999).

It is important to explain the consistency of these findings in SLA. There are two possible explanations: (a) lower proficiency learners’ attentional capacity was consumed more by processing meaning than linguistic form (Schmidt, 2001), resulting in reduced languaging about the form; (b) lower proficiency L2 learners are less psycholinguistically ready to pay attention to forms than higher proficiency L2 learners (Leeser, 2004). Thus, the pedagogical implication drawn from these results is that if L2 teachers want their low-intermediate learners to engage in grammar-oriented languaging even during decontextualized grammar exercises, they may need certain kinds of intervention to draw their learners’ attention to grammatical forms.

# 5.3. Exercise difficulty and type of languaging

We found that the low-intermediate and high-intermediate proficiency groups were engaged in more grammatical and syntactic analyses of the comprehension exercises than of the production exercises. This finding is contrary to Swain’s (2005) Output Hypothesis in the sense that the production exercises should have produced more grammar-oriented languaging than the comprehension exercises.

There may be a relationship between exercise difficulty and the type of languaging. Recall that the mean percentages of correct answers for the comprehension-oriented exercises ( $100 \%$ and $92 \%$ ) were higher than those for the production-oriented exercises ( $70 \%$ and $20 \%$ ). Because the production exercises were more difficult than the comprehension exercises, the production exercises might have required more attention to perform than the comprehension exercises did (Schmidt, 2001). As a result, the participants were not able to focus on the grammatical and syntactic analyses necessary for the production exercises. Therefore, participants may have ended up in engaging in less grammar-oriented languaging for the production exercises than for the comprehension exercises.

Future research that explores the relationship between exercise difficulty and the type of languaging is necessary before such speculations can be confirmed. However, our results indicate that if production exercises are either too easy ( $70 \%$ correct answers for the high-intermediate students) or too difficult $20 \%$ correct answers for the low-intermediate students), L2 learners seem to engage in less languaging than they otherwise would. These results imply that when L2 teachers choose production-based grammar exercises for L2 development, they should take care in considering the exercise difficulty.

# 5.4. Further research directions

The current study was limited in several ways. First, the use of a single sentence in this study weakens claims about the role of languaging in response to comprehension-oriented and production-oriented grammar exercises. Therefore, future studies need to collect as large a sample as possible of performances from individuals. Second, the present study did not examine the relationship between languaging and L2 learning: whether languaging leads to L2 learning, and if so, how. To answer this question, a research design to assess learning outcomes such as a pretest-treatment-posttest should be incorporated into further studies.

The shortage of research examining the complex interactions among variables suggests the need for further studies to examine interactions among the type and amount of languaging, the type of task, and level of L2 proficiency (Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007; Williams, 1999). Given that languaging during and after comprehension and production is one of the ways L2 learning occurs (Swain, 2006; Swain et al., 2009) and differential roles of comprehending and producing language in L2 learning have been the object of intensive empirical inquiry in the current SLA literature (e.g., Erlam, 2003; Morgan-Short and Bowden, 2006; Toth, 2006), more studies are necessary to explore the roles of languaging in language comprehension and production. In this study, we demonstrated how our participants languaged about language following comprehension-oriented and production-oriented grammar exercises.

It is also necessary to explore the roles of languaging in L2 learning using decontextualized grammar exercises. Although grammar exercises must be distinguished from contextualized pedagogic tasks such as dictogloss and jigsaw (Ellis, 2003), discrete grammar exercises such as translations may play an important role in L2 teaching, particularly in EFL contexts whose first language is generally shared among students and teachers such as in Japan (Suzuki and Itagaki, 2007) and Spain (Garcia Mayo, 2002a,b). Clearly, discrete grammar exercises need further investigation.

# Acknowledgements

Parts of this study were presented at Second Language Research Forum, University Park, PA, in October 2004 and World Congress of Applied Linguistics, Madison, WI, in July 2005. We are grateful to the editor and reviewers of System and Alister Cumming, Jill Cummings, LiShih Huang, Sharon Lapkin, Colette Peters, Paul Quinn, Nina Spada, and Merrill Swain for their useful suggestions and helpful comments on earlier versions of this article. Our sincere thanks also go to the teacher and the students for their participation in this study.

# References

Borer, L., 2007. Depth of processing in private and social speech: its role in the retention of word knowledge by adult EAP learners. Canadian Modern Language Review 64, 269–295.   
Centeno-Cortez, B., Jimenez Jimenez, A.F., 2004. Problem-solving tasks in a foreign language: the importance of the L1 in private verbal thinking. International Journal of Applied Linguistics 14, 7–35.   
Chi, M., Bassok, M., Lewis, M.W., Reimann, P., Glaser, R., 1989. Self-explanations: how students study and use examples in learning to solve problems. Cognitive Science 13, 145–182.   
Cumming, A., 1990. Metalinguistic and ideational thinking in second language composing. Written Communication 7, 482–511.   
de la Colina, A.A., Garcia Mayo, M.D.P., 2007. Attention to form across collaborative tasks by low-proficiency learners in an EFL setting. In: Garcia Mayo, D.P. (Ed.), Investigating Tasks in Formal Language Learning. Multilingual Matters, Clevedon, UK, pp. 91–116.   
DiCamilla, F.J., Lantolf, J.P., 1994. The linguistic analysis of private writing. Language Sciences 16, 347–369.   
Ellis, R., 2003. Task-Based Language Learning and Teaching. Oxford University Press, Oxford.   
Erlam, R., 2003. Evaluating the relative effectiveness of structured-input and output-based instruction in foreign language learning: results from an experimental study. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 25, 559–582.   
Fortune, A., 2005. Learners’ use of metalanguage in collaborative form-focused L2 output tasks. Language Awareness 14, 21–38.   
Garcia Mayo, M.D.P., 2002a. Effectiveness of two form-focused tasks in advanced EFL pedagogy. International Journal of Applied Linguistics 12, 156–175.   
Garcia Mayo, M.D.P., 2002b. Interaction in advanced EFL pedagogy: a comparison of form-focused activities. International Journal of Educational Research 37, 323–341.   
Lapkin, S., Swain, M., Knouzi, I., 2008. Postsecondary French as a second language students learn the grammatical concept of voice: study design, materials development, and pilot data. In: Lantolf, J.P., Poehner, M. (Eds.), Sociocultural Theory and the Teaching of Second Languages. Equinox Press, London, pp. 229–255.   
Leeser, M.J., 2004. Learner proficiency and focus on form during collaborative dialogue. Language Teaching Research 8, 55–81.   
Li, D., 2004. Trustworthiness of think-aloud protocols in the study of translation processes. International Journal of Applied Linguistics 14 (3), 301–313.   
Morgan-Short, K., Bowden, H.W., 2006. Processing instruction and meaningful output-based instruction: effects on second language development. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 27, 31–65.   
Negueruela, E., 2008. Revolutionary pedagogies: learning that leads to second language development. In: Lantolf, J.P., Poehner, M. (Eds.), Sociocultural Theory and the Teaching of Second Languages. Equinox Press, London, pp. 189–227.   
Negueruela, E., Lantolf, J., 2006. Concept-based pedagogy and the acquisition of L2 Spanish. In: Salaberry, R., Lafford, B.A. (Eds.), The Art of Teaching Spanish: Second Language Acquisition from Research to Praxis. Georgetown University Press, pp. 79–102.   
Qi, D., Lapkin, S., 2001. Exploring the role of noticing in a three-stage second language writing task. Journal of Second Language Writing 10, 277–303.   
Roebuck, R., 2000. Subjects speak out: how learners position themselves in a psycholinguistic task. In: Lantolf, J. (Ed.), Sociocultural Theory and Second Language Learning. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 79–95.   
Sachs, R., Polio, C., 2007. Learners’ uses of two types of written feedback on an L2 writing revision task. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 29, 67–100.   
Schmidt, R., 2001. Attention. In: Robinson, P. (Ed.), Cognition and Second Language Instruction. Cambridge University Press, UK, pp. 3–32.   
Shehadeh, A., 2003. Learner output, hypothesis testing, and internalizing linguistic knowledge. System 31, 155–171.   
Simard, D., 2004. Using diaries to promote metalinguistic reflection among elementary school students. Language Awareness 13, 34–48.   
Simard, D., French, L., Fortierm, V., 2007. Elicited metalinguistic reflection and second language learning: is there a link? System 35, 509– 522.   
Storch, N., 2001. Comparing ESL learners’ attention to grammar on three different classroom tasks. RELC Journal 32, 104–124.   
Storch, N., 2008. Metatalk in a pair work activity: level of engagement and implications for language development. Language Awareness 17, 95–114.   
Sullivan, J., Caplan, N., 2004. Beyond the dictogloss: learner-generated attention to form in a collaborative, communicative classroom activity. Working Papers in Educational Linguistics 19, 65–89.   
Suzuki, M., 2008. Japanese learners’ self revisions and peer revisions of their written compositions in English. TESOL Quarterly 42, 209– 233.   
Suzuki, W., Itagaki, N., 2007. Learner metalinguistic reflections following output-oriented and reflective activities. Language Awareness 16, 131–146.   
Suzuki, W., Swain, M., Submitted for Publication. Verbalization in second language acquisition research: a vehicle for data collection and a medium for language learning? Manuscript.   
Swain, M., 2005. The output hypothesis: theory and research. In: Hinkel, E. (Ed.), The Handbook of Research in Second Language Teaching and Learning. Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Mahwah, NJ, pp. 471–483.   
Swain, M., 2006. Languaging, agency and collaboration in advanced language proficiency. In: Byrnes, H. (Ed.), Advanced Language Learning: The Contribution of Halliday and Vygotsky. Continuun, London, pp. 95–108.   
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., 1998. Interaction and second language learning: two adolescent French immersion students working together. Modern Language Journal 82 (3), 320–337.   
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., 2000. Task-based second language learning: the uses of the first language. Language Teaching Research 4, 251–274.   
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., 2001. Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: exploring task effects. In: Bygate, M., Skehan, S., Swain, M. (Eds.), Researching Pedagogic Tasks: Second Language Learning, Teaching and Testing. Longman, New York, pp. 99–118.   
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., 2002. Talking it through: two French immersion learners’ response to reformulation. International Journal of Educational Research 37, 285–304.   
Swain, M., Lapkin, S., Knouzi, I., Suzuki, W., Brooks, L., 2009. Languaging: University students learn the grammatical concepts in French. The Modern Language Journal 93, 5–29.   
Tocalli-Beller, A., Swain, M., 2005. Reformulation: the cognitive conflict and L2 learning it generates. International Journal of Applied Linguistics 15, 5–28.   
Tocalli-Beller, A., Swain, M., 2007. Riddles and puns in the ESL classroom: adults talk to learn. In: Mackey, A. (Ed.), Conversational Interaction in Second Language Acquisition: A Series of Empirical Studies. Oxford University Press, Oxford, pp. 143–167.   
Toth, P.D., 2006. Processing instruction and a role for output in second language acquisition. Language Learning 56, 319–385.   
Watanabe, Y., Swain, M., 2007. Effects of proficiency differences and patterns of pair interaction on second language learning: collaborative dialogue between adult ESL learners. Language Teaching Research 11, 121–142.   
Williams, J., 1999. Learner-generated attention to form. Language Learning 49, 583–625.