# A corpus-based view of lexical gender in written Business English

Pedro A. Fuertes-Olivera

Universidad de Valladolid, Escuela Universitaria de Estudios Empresariales, Paseo del Prado de la Magdalena s/n, 47005 Valladolid, Spain

# Abstract

This article investigates lexical gender in specialized communication. The key method of analysis is that of forms of address, professional titles, and ‘generic man’ in a 10 million word corpus of written Business English. After a brief introduction and literature review on both gender in specialized communication and similar corpus-based views of lexical gender in General English, the results obtained are explained. Mixed results were found. On the one hand, the ‘male-as-norm’ principle contributes to reinforcing typical gender stereotypes: for example, for each woman referred to in the corpus, there are more than 100 occurrences for man. On the other hand, advocates of non-sexist English have also influenced written Business English: for example, $M s$ is more than 9 times as frequent as Mrs. and Miss, which sustains the claim that equates $M s$ with professional settings. This article ends by discussing the ways in which the research findings of this study could positively impact upon the teaching of Business English.

$©$ 2006 The American University. Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

# 1. Introduction

Specialized corpora – i.e., genre- and topic-specific corpora designed to include only samples of language of a particular type, belonging to a particular genre, register, etc. – have been used to help with LSP teaching and learning, to identify specialized terms, to learn about word collocations, to learn about grammar, to learn about style, and to learn about concepts. Nickerson (2005), for example, refers to a number of corpus-based analyses of business communication (see also Nelson, 2006). She provides an overview of current research focusing on the use of English as a lingua franca in international business contexts, and affirms that in the course of the last decade two trends have become increasingly important in the investigation of business communication. One of them consists of analyzing contextualized communicative genres, emphasizing ‘‘the organizational and/or cultural factors that contribute to the realisation of the individual text/event under investigation’’ (Nickerson, 2005, p. 369). The second trend is concerned with identifying the language strategies that ‘‘can be associated with effective communication in business, regardless of whether the speaker/writer is a native or non-native speaker’’ (Nickerson, 2005, p. 369). In the spirit of Nickerson’s view, this article reports on an analysis of written Business English lexis that uses the notion of lexical gender to gain a clearer picture of the changes gender neutral language (i.e, language that is fair for men and women alike) have made in business texts. A corpus of approximately 10 million words of written Business English (the Wolverhampton Corpus of Written Business English (WBE); see Section 4, below) was utilized in order to investigate, firstly, how some courtesy and professional titles are being used in written Business English, and, secondly, the presence of ‘generic man’ in the WBE. In very broad terms, this paper analyzes to what extent lexical gender is present in a particular piece of discourse, a topic that has been examined quite extensively in general language and that needs to be explored to the same degree in specialized language. It starts by describing the state of play of gender in specialized communication; then by commenting on some recent corpus-based views of gender in general language corpora, it contextualizes the research in the general framework of the issue of language and gender, thus paving the way for incorporating ideological issues into the analysis of specialized communication. Finally, some findings are discussed, and conclusions are drawn, including the pedagogical consequences that this research may have when the results are introduced into the classroom.

# 2. The question of gender in specialized communication

Recent research on the issue of gender and language tends to concentrate on four categories of gender: grammatical gender, lexical gender, referential gender, and social gender. Hellinger and Bußmann (2001, p. 7) claim that ‘‘grammatical gender is an inherent property of the noun which controls agreement between the noun (the controller) and some (gender-variable) satellite element (the target) which may be an article, adjective, pronoun, verb, numeral or preposition.’’ As a general linguistic category, grammatical gender is a typical feature of languages such as German and Spanish, where nouns are classified as ‘masculine’, ‘feminine’ and ‘neuter’. In Spanish, for example, we may contrast actuario atractivo and actuaria atractiva, where atractivo and atractiva are, respectively, masculine and feminine forms of the adjective atractivo ‘‘attractive’’, selected in agreement with the grammatical gender of actuario (masculine) ‘‘male actuary’’ and actuaria ‘‘female actuary’’.

Referential gender ‘‘relates linguistic expressions to a non-linguistic reality; more specifically, referential gender identifies a referent as ‘‘female’’, ‘‘male’’ or ‘‘gender-indefinite’’’’ (Hellinger & Bußmann (2001, p. 8)). For example, a personal noun like colloquial Spanish zorro´ n ‘‘prostitute’’ is grammatically masculine, has a lexical-semantic specification as [female], and is generally used to refer to females (Fuertes Olivera, 1992). This shows that in gender languages (Hellinger & Bußmann, 2001, p. 5), some personal nouns show a complex relationship between grammatical gender and referential gender.

Social gender is a category that refers ‘‘to the socially imposed dichotomy of masculine and feminine roles and character traits’’ (Kramarae & Treichler, 1985, p. 173). Social gender arises from ‘‘stereotypical assumptions about what are appropriate social roles for women and men, including expectations about who will be a typical member of the class of, say, surgeon or nurse’’(Hellinger & Bußmann, 2001, p. 11). For example, in English high-status occupational terms such as surgeon will frequently be pronominalized by the male-specific he in contexts where referential gender is either not known or irrelevant. On the other hand, low-status occupational terms such as nurse will often be followed by the referent she. Even for general human nouns such as producer, grammars have traditionally prescribed the choice of he. Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999, p. 316) explain how this use of masculine pronouns has come in for criticism in recent years, and it has become common to use two strategies to avoid gender-specific reference: use of coordinated pronoun forms such as he or she as in help your child understand what he or she reads; use of plural rather than singular forms as in not everybody remembers where they were when Bush was re-elected. Gendering practices in English, then, are mainly associated with third-person singular pronoun. McConnell-Ginet (2003, p. 91) claims that one thing ‘‘this means is that use of a singular personal pronoun carries a presumption of sex attribution’’, and adds that in English ‘‘it is very difficult to talk about a third person without ascribing sex to them – and virtually impossible to do so over an extended period.’’

Lexical gender refers to the existence of lexical units such as mother, son, etc. carrying the semantic property [female] or [male], respectively, ‘‘which may in turn relate to the extra-linguistic category of referential gender (or ‘‘sex of referent’’)’’ (Hellinger & Buß- mann (2001, p. 7)). In English such nouns may be described as female-specific or male-specific, in contrast to nouns such as consumer, which is considered to be gender-indefinite or gender-neutral. Biber et al. (1999, p. 312) claim that the masculine–feminine distinction may also be made explicit by formal markers such as male or female as in male nurse or female doctor, by compounding with gender-specific elements as in policewoman, and by the use of gender-specific derivational endings, as in Actor John Travolta and Actress Vanessa Redgrave. Typically, ‘‘gender-specific terms require the choice of semantically corresponding forms, e.g., the English pronouns she or he, while in the case of genderindefinite nouns, pronominal choice may be determined by reference (e.g., to a known individual), tradition (choice of ‘‘false generics’’. . .), or speaker attitude. . .’’ (Hellinger & Bußmann, 2001, p. 7). In this sense, McConnell-Ginet (2003, p. 93) acknowledges that ‘‘it is well known that sometimes it is the social relations and not the strictly biological that count most’’. For example, regarding forms of address in English, she argues that ‘‘the social relations typically prevail in families in which children are adopted or in which children come from different marriages.’’

This paper is concerned with lexical expressions of gender in specialized communication. Since the beginning of the 2000s the concept of gender sensitivity, (Cameron, 1996, p. 36) to explain that some ways of using a language are ‘‘functionally, aesthetically or morally preferable to others’’ has been incorporated into the analysis of specialized communication. Regarding lexical choices, for example, Bowker (2001) claims that terminological work needs to take into account the fact that some ways of naming are preferable to others. She documents her proposal by examining the construction of gender in a specialized domain, that of infertility. By analyzing a corpus of 492,011 words, she found a male bias in the coining of terms for explaining infertility. For example, infertility is described as autoimmunity, or sperm antibodies when it refers to men, but as hostility if it refers to women. She found that the term for the male disorder appears in both semispecialized and specialized texts whereas the term for the female disease is only found in specialized texts, and that in the semi-specialized literature ‘‘men are clearly perceived to be suffering from a serious medical condition with a seriously technical name; women, in contrast, are not perceived to be suffering from a medical condition but are simply at fault – they HAVE problems, ARE abnormal or FAIL in their tasks’’ (Bowker, 2001, p. 597; her emphasis). Bowker also found a male bias in the daily usage of this medical condition, also described with collocations such as incompetent cervix and retrograde ejaculation to refer to the condition in women and men, respectively. Similarly, the analysis of economic texts performed by Fuertes Olivera, Velasco Sacrista´n, and Samaniego Ferna´ndez (2003) has shed light on the lack of gender sensitivity in the coinage of terms, not only because the terms analyzed – i.e., paymaster, seigniorage or seignorage, etc. – showed male denotations, but also because the contexts where they were used and explained indicated male connotations reinforcing gender stereotypes, such as ‘man as provider’, ‘woman as dependent’, ‘man as professional or would-be professional’, ‘woman as silence’, and ‘woman as frail’.

# 3. A corpus-based view of lexical gender in general English

Following this second approach, this paper offers a corpus-based view of lexical gender in written Business English. This section of the paper positions the study within the context of similar work carried out in General English, which will facilitate in showing how the norms of Business English differ from the norms of these other, more general corpora. Biber et al. (1999, pp. 312–316), for example, comment that data from the Longman Spoken and Written English Corpus (the LSWE Corpus) confirm that English speakers and writers use far more words denoting males than females. Similarly, Romaine (2001) shows that chairman and spokesman are still prevailing titles in the British National Corpus (BNC), and that the use of a supposedly generic form does not lead to generic reference: for example, looking at the first 50 examples of chairperson, she found that only half the uses were generic; that is, they referred to the office rather than a particular person holding it. However, she also adds that there is evidence of changing usage, and that reference to women exhibits the greatest variability in that only women can be referred to with all five titles: chairman, chairwoman, chairperson, Madam chairman, and chairlady.

Similar conclusions can be drawn from more focused research. Regarding forms of address, for example, research has shown that the introduction of the term $M s$ has been used to refer to a career woman, a prostitute, a divorced woman, or a ‘lefty’ (Fuertes Olivera, 1991). More recently, Holmes (2001a, 2001b) has compared frequencies of occurrence of gender-differentiated address and reference titles in different corpora and has found that Mrs. remains the most frequent form, and that $M s$ is more frequent than Miss. Similarly, Romaine (2001) studied the number of occurrences of titles and forms of address in the BNC. She found that Miss and Mrs. accounted for around $9 5 \%$ of the total usage, that there were more uses of $M r$ . than of Miss, Mrs., and $M s$ together, and that Mrs. and Miss outnumbered $M s$ .

Another disputed area is the use of the so-called ‘generic man’. Different research has shown a dramatic decline in the use of androcentric generics. Meyerhoff (1987) found a decline in the use of these generics in New Zealand English. Holmes (2001a) compared the use of generic man in different corpora and found ‘‘few instances of generic man in its narrow meaning of ‘humankind’ in any of the three corpora’’ (Holmes, 2001a, p. 124). She also adds that New Zealand usage differs from Australian and British usage when man is used in a broad sense: there are far fewer instances of these pseudo-generics in the New Zealand press material.

This paper takes this work further by undertaking an analysis of gender distinctions in written Business English, in terms of forms of address, professional titles and ‘generic man’ in a 10 million-word corpus of written Business English.

# 4. A Corpus-based view of lexical gender in the Wolverhampton Corpus of Written Business English (WBE)

The WBE is a specialized corpus concerned with Business English collected from 23 different web sites related to business.1 It is an annotated corpus of 10,186,259 words; also a synchronic corpus, including only texts available on the web during a 6-month period in 1999–2000; and a monolingual English corpus, which comprises only texts written in English, although no restriction was applied as regards the variety of English used. It is also a written corpus, containing only written materials. However, a few of the documents are transcripts of speeches. These amount to about $0 . 7 \%$ of the total corpus. Hence, they are almost insignificant from a statistical point of view and do not skew the data and the results reported on in this article.

Thanks to the amount of information available online, the WBE contains a selection from a wide variety of text types. These range from product descriptions, company press releases, and annual financial reports, to business journals, academic research papers, political speeches and government reports.

The corpus comes from a range of different countries and supranational organizations such as the World Trade Organization. For example, there are 123 files totaling 765,005 words collected from a range of official documents such as press releases, research and analysis reports, trade policy reviews of different countries, ministerial conferences, speeches by Director-General, etc. The Users Reference Guide point out that there are several categories of people for whom this corpus can be useful: (i) language teachers, especially teachers specializing in ESP may use the corpus to identify areas of language to focus on, to develop teaching materials for classroom use, and to refer to when problematic language issues arise in their interaction with students; (ii) language students will have access to authentic examples of Business English; (iii) the language engineering community; (iv) Business communication teachers and students will also have a core resource through which they can enhance their understanding of the Business world. For example, the WBE Corpus is useful for exploring how women are faring in a professional context. This analysis will consist of different stages: (i) the study of some linguistics features – for example, the presence of forms of address, professional titles, and the so-called ‘generic man’ - in the WBE Corpus, will show, in part, how lexical gender behaves in written Business English; (ii) considering that the WBE Corpus contains documents from different countries, then this may be an important variable in determining frequency of neutral/sexist language in the different written Business English varieties (i.e., Hong Kong English; WTO English; British English; American English, etc.), thus paving the way for understanding whether there are particular written Business English varieties which are more/less likely to use neutral/sexist language, and linking this to the impact of feminism in different countries; (iii) it will also be worth considering the authors and audience of the documents since an acknowledgment of production and reception are very relevant to studies of specialized corpora. This article will be restricted to analyzing some linguistic features, leaving room for further analyses on the topics suggested.

# 4.1. Forms of address

Quirk, Greenbaum, Leech, and Svartvik (1985, p. 775) claim that in addressing somebody one knows by name, last name preceded by title (Mr. Jones) is a polite formal manner of address, while first name (Peter) indicates friendly familiarity. Although in any language lexical gender is an important parameter in the structure of address terms, languages differ ‘‘considerably in the type of obligatory and optional information they encode in their address system’’ (Hellinger & Bußmann, 2001, p. 16). Although English can be characterized as a language with moderate distinctions, it shows an important generic difference: there is only one term for males $( M r . )$ , whereas women can be addressed by $M s$ (no reference to her marital status), Mrs. (she is married), or Miss (she is single). In other words, the introduction of the term $M s$ in the 1970s ‘‘was intended to eliminate linguistic discrimination by providing a term for women which, like $M r .$ , did not signal marital status’’ (Holmes, 2001a, p. 119). By counting the total number of occurrences on the above forms of address we found that women are underrepresented in the WBE Corpus: there are 2490 occurrences of $M r$ . and only 173 with a female form of address $( 9 3 . 5 \%$ and $6 . 5 \%$ , respectively) (Table 1). In other words, there are 14.3 times more occurrences of $M r$ . compared to the female forms of address taken collectively.

Our next step was a detailed analysis of the female terms (Table 2).

The results show that there are indications that the tenets of advocates of non-sexist language are permeating written Business English: (i) $M s$ is more than 9 times as frequent as the other two titles put together, which sustains the claim that equates $M s$ with professional settings. All the uses refer to a professional woman, as example [1] shows;2 (ii) contrary to what has been found in general corpora, Mrs. is disappearing from business written English. This suggests that the ‘feminist word’ has spread considerably, since the uses of Mrs. found reinforces the marital status of the woman referred to in the WBE Corpus, as example [2] shows; (iii) the linguistic reform envisaged by linguists such as Pauwels (1998) is gaining ground. This suggests that part of the gender bias spotted in many general English corpora is disappearing from professional settings; (iv) Miss is almost non existent. The only occurrence in the WBE Corpus does not refer to a particular woman, but to a market brand associated with the stereotype of the ‘sex kitten woman’, as example [3] (below) shows:

Table 1 Male and female forms of address in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Male (Mr.)</td><td>2490</td><td>93.5</td></tr><tr><td>Female (Ms, Mrs., Miss)</td><td>173</td><td>6.5</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2663</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 2 Female titles in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Ms.</td><td>157</td><td>90.7</td></tr><tr><td>Mrs.</td><td>15</td><td>8.7</td></tr><tr><td>Miss.</td><td>1</td><td>0.6</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>173</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

[1] The Commission has presented four green papers on the encryption of broadcasts, commercial communications, financial services and the liability of the statutory auditor. It has issued a communication on a pilot project to simplify legislation for the internal market (SLIM), the first results of which will be presented before the end of the year. A green paper on public contracts is also expected before the end of the year. The Commission has launched an initial debate on pluralism in the media. In the field of free movement of individuals, it has set up a high-level group chaired by Ms. Veil.3   
[2] It does not include 1546 shares registered in the name of her husband. Mrs. Fate3 disclaims beneficial ownership of those shares.   
[3] For the trend market, tight transparent pieces are layered or worn over bikini-style bras or sports bras. The Miss3 Sixty label shows good examples of the ‘‘street sports meet sex kitten’’ look for younger women and is a high-performing brand in the mid-market.

# 4.2. Professional titles

Professional or occupational titles refer to people engaged in a specific activity as their paid occupation rather than as a pastime or hobby. Considering that gender in English is primarily a semantic category, with social implications (Hellinger, 1900), research has shown that social gender is very active with English professional titles: many high-status occupational terms such as professor will be presented as male terms in contexts where gender of referent is either not known or irrelevant, whereas low-status occupational titles, such as schoolteacher tend to be considered female terms, also in contexts where gender is irrelevant or not known. Romaine (2001, p. 158) comments that

The more general marking of women who occupy high status professions signals a deviation from some presumed norm. Namely, that a doctor is a man, so a woman who is a doctor must somehow be marked as such, either by derivation (doctoress), compounding (woman doctor) or adjectival modification (female doctor), which conveys the idea that she is not the ‘‘real’’ thing. This also works in opposite fashion, although rarely, as for example in the case of male nurse (or male midwife), where the male has to be marked because the norm is assumed to be female. The BNC has 20 instances of male nurse and only one of female nurse.

Table 3 Number of occurrences of professional titles in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Reference</td><td colspan="6">Professional title</td></tr><tr><td>COO</td><td>CEO</td><td>Managing director</td><td>Dr.</td><td> Professor</td><td>Total</td></tr><tr><td>Reference to men</td><td>47</td><td>456</td><td>168</td><td>136</td><td>217</td><td>1024</td></tr><tr><td>Reference to women</td><td>8</td><td>26</td><td>10</td><td>11</td><td>57</td><td>112</td></tr><tr><td>Unspecified</td><td>16</td><td>159</td><td>18</td><td>20</td><td>14</td><td>227</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>71</td><td>641</td><td>196</td><td>167</td><td>288</td><td>1363</td></tr></table></body></html>

The analysis in the WBE Corpus focused on five high-status professional titles: $C O O$ , CEO, Managing Director, Dr., and Professor (Table 3). It shows that both women and men are referred to by the five professional terms analyzed, and that professional women are faring slightly better with professional titles than with forms of address (although still fall far behind professional men in terms of comparative frequencies): there are 9.1 occurrences of professional men for one occurrence of professional women, whereas there are 14.3 occurrences of $M r$ . for one instance of a female form of address (Table 1, above). Examples [4] and [5] illustrate how professional women and men are typically referred to in the Corpus.

[4] Patti Manuel, President and COO, Long Distance Division Sprint Corp. ‘‘I am a boss, an employee, a friend, a mother, a daughter, and a member of my church and community. .   
[5] Andy Pearson has had no fewer than four careers. He has served as a senior partner at McKinsey & Co., as President and COO of PepsiCo, as a professor at Harvard Business School, and as a partner in a management buy-out firm.

# 4.3. Generic man

English grammars, mainly prescriptive grammars, usually state that masculine terms – such as ‘generic man’- can often be used as duals to refer to both women and men. The prescription of ‘generic man’ has long been at the centre of debates about linguistic sexism. The ‘‘asymmetries involved here, i.e. the choice of masculine/male expressions as the normal or ‘‘unmarked’’ case with the resulting invisibility of feminine/female expressions are reflections of an underlying gender belief system, which in turn creates expectations about appropriate female and male behaviour’’ (Hellinger & Bußmann, 2001, p. 10). Two frequent uses of ‘generic man’ are instances of man where the intended reference is humankind, and uses of man as ‘pseudo-generic’ referring to any person. Examples [6] and [7] illustrate respectively the use of man referring to humankind and to a particular unidentified person (i.e., ‘pseudo-generic man):

[6] Thinking on these issues is sound but it is a great misfortune of man that intentions by themselves cannot translate into action and can realise the ultimate goals.   
[7] Under ERISA, private pension plans may only make investments that would be made by a ‘‘prudent man’’.

One consequence of the uses of ‘generic man’ is ‘‘what has been called ‘‘slippage’’ (when an utterance starts as a generic but slips into masculinity before it ends), not only in people’s usage, but also in interpreting their meaning accurately for corpus analysis . . . Slippage is obviously a crucial area in the fight against sexist constructions of female identity (Cameron, 1985) ’’ (Holmes, 2001a, p. 124). Slippage is related to the fact that English speakers and writers make reference to men more often than women. For example, Biber et al. (1999, p. 314) claim that there are considerably more references to actors than to actresses in English language use in general. Similarly, in the WBE Corpus there are 208 occurrences of man and 127 of women (see Table 4). In other words, for each occurrence of woman there are 1.63 occurrences of man. Examples [8] and [9] illustrate respectively the use of ‘generic man’ and ‘specific man’:

[8] generic man And our true worth will increase because we will be responsible for what we do. The organization man had to check his identity at the office door.   
[9] specific man Travis Stratford is a busy man. He has scheduled a $7 . 4 5 \mathrm { a . m }$ . interview and a $1 0 \ \mathrm { a . m }$ . teleconference in Chicago before his afternoon flight to Salt Lake City.

To avoid the use of ‘generic man’, advocates of non-sexist language have defended the principle of neutralization which consists of avoiding false generics, such as ‘generic man’. Data from the WBE Corpus offer mixed results. On the one hand, ‘generic man’ is found in 79 of the 208 instances of man $( 3 7 . 9 8 \% )$ , and on the other hand, the data agree with those previously reported by Cooper (1984), Meyerhoff (1987), and Holmes (2001a), who have claimed that the use of ‘generic man’ is decreasing. Hence, it can be hypothesized that the principle of neutralization is rather active in written Business English. In support of this conclusion our findings indicate, firstly, that one ‘generic man’ is used per 129,000 words; secondly, that there are similar phrases with man and woman: ‘man-made’, ‘one-man’, ‘yesman’, ‘man-year’, ‘one-woman’, ‘woman-run’, and ‘woman-friendly’; and thirdly, that dual gender reference by lexical means has increased considerably. Example [10] shows how the phrases ‘salary-man’, salary-woman’ behave similarly in the WBE Corpus:

[10] As a ‘‘salary-man or salary-woman’’ you can always invest in your semi-detached suburban dream and let your wealth grow without dirtying your hands as a trades-person.

Regarding dual gender reference by lexical means, we also obtained mixed results. On the one hand, neutral person is much more frequent than ‘generic man’: generic reference in the WBE Corpus is mostly expressed by neutral person, something which leads us to conclude that the use of generic person is a defining feature of written Business English (Table 5). Example [11] illustrates the use of neutral person in the Corpus:

Table 4 Occurrences of man and woman in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Man</td><td>208</td><td>62.08</td></tr><tr><td>Woman</td><td>127</td><td>37.92</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>335</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5 ‘Generic man’ and person in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Generic reference</td><td>3752</td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>Generic person</td><td>3673</td><td>97.9</td></tr><tr><td>Generic man</td><td>79</td><td>2.1</td></tr></table></body></html>

[11] It is not necessary to provide the amount or percentage of the outstanding voting securities owned by the controlling person.

On the other hand, our data agree with previous corpus analyses. Biber et al. (1999, p. 315), for example, claim that compounds ending in –person(s) and –people are recent formations, coined ‘‘to overcome issues of bias associated with the use of masculine forms in a dual gender function’’, and that the frequency ‘‘of words ending in –person/–persons/– people is low compared with corresponding words with –man and –men.’’ In line with this claim, in the WBE Corpus the frequency of words ending in –person/–persons/–people is also low compared with corresponding words ending in –man and –men: there are 2191 occurrences with –man/–men, 20 occurrences with –woman/-women, and 109 occurrences with –person(s)/-people (see Table 6).

A further analysis of the compounds ending in –man/men or in –woman/women found in the WBE Corpus also indicates mixed results. On the one hand, as expected, men typically occupy a broader economic spectrum, and are, therefore, referred to in many more trades and professions than women (Table 7). Examples [12] and [13] illustrate, respectively uses of two compounds ending in –man and –woman:

Table 6 Occurrences of –man, -woman and –person in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>N</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Man</td><td>2191</td><td>94.4</td></tr><tr><td>Woman</td><td>20</td><td>0.9</td></tr><tr><td>Person</td><td>109</td><td>4.7</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2320</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 7 Number of trades and professions identified with –man (–men), and –woman (–women) in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Trades and professions</td><td>Number</td><td>Instance</td></tr><tr><td>With -man/men</td><td>39</td><td>Adman, businessman, cameraman, chairman, councilman, craftsman, deliveryman, doorman, draughts-man, fireman, fisherman, foreman,. freshman, Goodman, handyman, journeyman, layman, madman, mailman, middleman, newsman, ombudsman, pitchman, point man, policeman, postman, repairman, salary-man, salesman, seaman, snowman, spokesman,</td></tr><tr><td>With -woman/women</td><td>7</td><td>sportsman, statesman, straw-man, taxman, top-man, workman, yeoman, Businesswoman, chairwoman, craftswoman, middle-woman, salary- woman, saleswoman, spokeswoman</td></tr></table></body></html>

[12] Authority and position is an inherited commodity vested in those who for reasons of birth or ritual selection represent the traditional customs, e.g. the monarch/dynasty, the temple, the lord-knight-yeoman and serf, the guild master and journeyman apprentice.

[13] Lourdes Townsend is a career-focused businesswoman who knows exactly what she wants.

On the other hand, the presence of gender neutral terms is rather high, perhaps an indirect indication that women are faring better than expected in Business/Economic activities. For example, an analysis of the presence of ‘chair-forms’ reveals that gender neutral terms such as chair and chairperson amounts to $12 \%$ of the total occurrences. In other words, for 7.6 occurrences of chairman there is a gender neutral term (Table 8), a higher figure than previously reported for terms of address and professional titles. Example [14] shows a use of chairperson referring to a woman:

[14] Before joining Patton Boggs, Michelle Bernard was chairperson of the District of Columbia. . ..

A further analysis of the 2070 occurrences reveals that 1428 of them (68.9) indicate specific reference, showing three interesting findings: (i) the overwhelming majority of the instances of chairman and chair were identifiable as male $( 9 8 . 7 \%$ and $7 6 . 2 \%$ , respectively); (ii) a majority of the instances of chairperson refer to women $( 9 6 . 9 \% )$ ; (iii) reference to men is almost 23 times more frequent than reference to women (Table 9).

In other words, the analysis of the ‘chair forms’ also offers contradictory results. Firstly, as identified in the analysis commented in Section 3, speakers and writers make reference to men more often than to women: in the WBE Corpus, there are more than 22 references to man for one reference to woman. Secondly, although the domain of Business/Economics is, in part, a male-dominated haven - thus reinforcing gender stereotypes such as the one which maintains the distinction between paid outdoor activities (i.e., professional occupations and roles typically considered male activities) and unpaid housework (i.e., typically associated with women)-, women are escalating the rungs of the professional ladder and moving to the top post: there are 60 occurrences of ‘chair forms’ in the WBE Corpus referring to powerful women working as bosses of the District of Columbia Redevelopment Land Agency, Development Funds promoted by the United Nations, private companies such as Delaware Investments, and international working groups such as the ILO’s Working Group on the Social Dimensions of the Liberalization of International Trade, as example [15] shows:

Table 8 Number and $\%$ of the ‘chair-forms’ in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Chair-form</td><td>Number</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Chairman</td><td>1830</td><td>88.4</td></tr><tr><td>Chairperson</td><td>42</td><td>2.0</td></tr><tr><td>Chair</td><td>196</td><td>9.5</td></tr><tr><td>Chairwoman</td><td>2</td><td>0.1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>2070</td><td>100</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 9 Specific reference of the ‘Chair- forms’ in the WBE corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Chair-form</td><td colspan="4">Reference</td></tr><tr><td>Male</td><td>%</td><td>Female</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Chairman, 1352 (100%)</td><td>1335</td><td>98.7</td><td>17</td><td>1.3</td></tr><tr><td>Chairperson, 32 (100%)</td><td>1</td><td>3.1</td><td>31</td><td>96.9</td></tr><tr><td>Chair, 42 (100%)</td><td>32</td><td>76.2</td><td>10</td><td>23.8</td></tr><tr><td>Chairwoman, 2 (100%)</td><td>0</td><td>0</td><td>2</td><td>100</td></tr><tr><td>Total, 1428 (100%)</td><td>1368</td><td>95.8</td><td>60</td><td>4.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

[15] Ann R. Leven, Walter P. Babich, Anthony D. Knerr and Thomas F. Madison serve on the Fund’s audit committee; Ms. Leven is the chairperson.

Finally, some of the changes brought about in the gender system in response to feminist activism may have somehow backfired. For example, the skewed distribution of chairperson and chair may suggest that chairperson tends to be more associated with women than men, whereas chair prefers male reference. Finally, the four chair forms commented on are still being used to make reference to woman. Surprisingly, of the 60 instances referring to woman, there are 17 instances of chairman $( 2 8 . 3 \% )$ , something which is typically explained in terms of androcentric ideologies. Thus, in the WBE Corpus, the women referred to as chairmen are entrepreneurs, experts working for very well-known multinationals and/or institutions, or working for men’s magazines such as Playboy. Examples [16], [17], and [18] illustrate respectively the above referred uses of chairman/ chairmen:

[16] Patricia Gallup, Chairman of the Board recently named Entrepreneur of the Year. [17] Mitleton-Kelly is the Information System Research Fellow at the LSE and the Seminar Series initiator, chairman and organiser. [18] Christie Hefner Chairman and CEO Playboy Enterprises Inc. Chicago, IL.

# 5. Conclusion

# 5.1. Lexical gender and written Business English

This paper has investigated the presence of lexical gender in written Business English. By analyzing to what extent lexical gender is present in the Wolverhampton Corpus of Written Business English, we have drawn two main conclusions regarding social titles, professional titles and ‘generic man’. Firstly, the ‘Male-As-Norm’ underlying principle of lexical gender is also found in the Wolverhampton Corpus of Written Business English: (i) for each woman referred to in the corpus, there are more than 10 occurrences for man; (ii) of the 2663 forms of address used, more than $9 3 \%$ signal males; (iii) Business settings are dominated by males, particularly because management positions are filled by males, and there are many more trades and professions filled by males.

Secondly, advocates of non-sexist language seem to be having some influence on Business English: (i) $M s$ is more than nine times as frequent as Mrs. and Miss put together; a finding which sustains the claim that equates $M s .$ . with professional setting; (ii) $M s .$ . is being used to refer to professional women without making any reference to their marital status; (iii) the married/unmarried dichotomy currently used when referring to women is disappearing in this domain: there are only 15 instances of $M r s .$ , usually identified in the Corpus as ‘wives of’; (iv) there are only 79 examples of ‘generic man’ in the Corpus: this means that there is one ‘generic man’ per 129,000 words; (v) the use of ‘generic person’ amounts to $9 7 . 9 \%$ of the total occurrences indicating dual gender reference by lexical means.

Finally, further study of more recent business corpora would be helpful in allowing us to ascertain the extent to which non-sexist language is taken up by Business writers, and would also be useful in exploring how gendered discourses can be identified, described and named (Sunderland, 2004). In this vein, the WBE Corpus offers data for further research on, firstly, whether there are particular countries or institutions which are more/less likely to use neutral/sexist language, and, secondly, on the relationship between gender and discourse analysis in order to uncover if, say, authors and audiences of the documents influence how the issue of gender is dealt with in the corpus (Litosseliti & Sunderland, 2002; Sunderland, 2004).

# 5.2. Pedagogical implications

This article ends by discussing the ways in which the research findings of this study could positively impact upon the teaching of Business English. Bowker (2001) points to the need to make the concept of gender sensitivity present in LSP activities. Nickerson (2005) asks what the implications of the findings of the studies on Business English for the teaching of Business English are. In our view, by making gender sensitivity an overt and deliberate part of our teaching activities, and by identifying potential areas of conflict in multicultural settings, several significant improvements can be made regarding the use of gender neutral language in Business English teaching and learning. Following Huddleston and Pullum (2002, pp. 484–495), for example, it seems reasonable to teach our students that until the 1970s it was usual to distinguish between gender (grammatical) and sex (extralinguistic). Since then, sex has ‘‘come to be used to refer to biological attributes and gender to the social construction of sex, and this usage has been incorporated into linguistics’’ (Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, p. 484). Thus, our students should be taught that gender refers to a grammatical category with social and/or ideological implications, usually connected to the fact that English gender classes are differentiated on the basis of relations with pronouns and the choice of pronoun is determined by denotation or reference, not by purely syntactic properties of the antecedent. Common nouns, for example, are classified according to their compatibility with the 3rd person singular pronouns, as ‘‘single-gender, dual-gender, and triple-gender common nouns according as they are compatible with just one, with two, or with all three of the core singular pronouns he, she, and it’’ (Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, p. 489). The discussion above is not to be interpreted as a noun which has two or three genders, but as a noun which can head the antecedent to he, she, or it. Similarly, the generic use of single-gender masculine nouns such as man has mounted a major campaign of linguistic correctness aiming at producing a more consistent and fair system. In practical terms, students are to be taught that traditional views that maintained that the purportedly sex-neutral he is the grammatical correct choice in opposition to singular they must be rejected because, firstly, research has shown that English speakers tend to shun consistency and head the antecedent to, say, he or she following social conventions, and, secondly, this usage contributes to hide the important role women are playing in many spheres of life. For example, dual-gender masculine/feminine nouns, say professional titles, denoting human without specification of sex must be referred to not by the purportedly sex-neutral he or the purportedly sex-neutral she but by the disjunctive coordination he or she, (including composite forms such as (s)he, s/he, or alternants he/ she), by singular they, or by avoidance strategies such as to use a plural antecedent. In other words, the fact that the primary meaning of he contains the component ‘male’ has been used by many linguists (mainly feminists) to oppose to its usage, which has led to proposing different avoidance strategies such as the one employed in example [10]: using you and your is a very specific avoidance strategy instead of he or she, respectively ‘‘so that we do not need to select a pronoun anaphoric to these latter NPs (. . .)’’ (Huddleston & Pullum, 2002, p. 495).

The above alternants have gained ground since the 1980s, something which has contributed to highlighting the social meaning of gender covering such matters as differences between the speech of men and women, sexist interpretations of linguistic manifestations, questions of identity and desire, etc. (Holmes & Meyerhoff, 2003; Velasco-Sacrista´n & Fuertes-Olivera, 2006). Regarding forms of address, professional titles and ‘generic man’ students and teachers alike must be made aware that the results reported in this study indicate, on the one hand, that women are faring better in professional contexts than previously reported, and, on the other hand, that men tend to outpace women in Business English contexts. In order to help women to gain ground in this domain students must be taught that central cases of sexism in language, especially the use of false generics such as ‘generic man’, or referring to women on the basis of their marital status, must be avoided. Considering that this study offers a focused perspective on the emergent norms in the domain of Business, and that it shows how the norms of written Business English differs from the norms of General English, it seems reasonable to conclude by indicating that teachers can meet the issue of language and gender in their Business English classes, many of them being taught in multicultural settings, by explicitly teaching what gendering practices mean in English, either by connecting the explanation with the often quoted claimed that ideology in specialized domains can be uncovered through critical discourse analyses, - for example, by explicitly commenting on the ideological aspects of the texts being used – or by insisting that these practices enter into gender constructions within and across genres in a host of different and complex ways. For example, the asymmetries in terms of semantic domains found in the phrases ‘one-man’/‘one-woman’. Although they are very similar, the Collins Cobuild English Dictionary records two entries for the former and only one for the second. The main difference between them is that ‘one-man’ refers to a performance done or to an organization controlled (our emphasis) by only one man rather than by several people, whereas ‘one-woman’ is limited to a performance or business done by only one woman, rather than by several people. In sum, it is important that students not only know that certain linguistic forms are preferable to others, but also which individual words must be connected to using neutral language in Business English. For example, different aspects of terminological work can be highlighted. It can be shown that cultural differences and local traditions may be responsible of differences between, say, Spanish compan˜ı´ a matriz (\*womb company), and English parent company/holding company. Both terms refer to a company which owns more than half the shares of another company. In Spanish the term reinforces a current gender stereotype (women are responsible of bringing up children), whereas in English this idea rests on both father and mother.

In sum, this article suggests that teachers and students refer to the English gender system as a grammatical category with social and cultural implications, some of which have been highlighted in this project.

# Acknowledgements

I am grateful to Brian Paltridge and two anonymous reviewers for their helpful and insightful comments on the earlier draft of this paper. In particular I appreciate their comments on future research work (the possible influence of geographical location; the possible influence of authors and audience), and the suggestions made to upgrade and strengthen Section 5.2. Thanks are also due to Carlos Matra´n for his help with the chisquare test for significance. Thanks are also due to la Junta de Castilla y Leo´n for financial support (Project Ref. VA 041A05).

# References

Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written English. Harlow: Longman.   
Bowker, L. (2001). Terminology and gender sensitivity: a corpus-based study of the LSP of infertility. Language in Society, 30, 589–610.   
Cameron, D. (1985). Feminism and linguistic theory. London: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Cameron, D. (1996). The language gender interface: challenging cooptation. In V. L. Bergvall, J. M. Bing, & A. F. Freed (Eds.), Rethinking language and gender research: Theory and practice (pp. 31–53). London: Longman.   
Cooper, R. L. (1984). The avoidance of androcentric generics. International Journal of the Sociology of Language, 50, 5–20.   
Fuertes Olivera, P. A. (1991). Ms: un ejemplo de empeoramiento sema´ntico. In C. Bernis, V. Demonte, E. Garrido, T. G. Calbet, & I. de la Torre (Eds.), Los estudios sobre la mujer: de la investigacio´ n a la docencia (pp. 363–370). Madrid: Universidad Auto´noma de Madrid.   
Fuertes Olivera, P. A. (1992). Mujer, lenguaje y sociedad: los estereotipos de ge´nero en ingle´s y en espan˜ol. Alcala´ de Henares: Ayto. de Alcala´ de Henares.   
Fuertes Olivera, P. A., Velasco Sacrista´n, M., & Samaniego Ferna´ndez, E. (2003). Gender sensitivity in specialized communication: a preliminary corpus-based study of the LSP of Economics. Ibe´rica, 6, 65–87.   
Hellinger, M. (1900). Kontrastive feministische Linguistik. Mechanismen sprachlicher Diskriminierung im Englischen und Deutschen. Munich (Forum Sprache).   
Hellinger, M., & Bußmann, H. (2001). Gender across languages. The linguistic representation of women and men. In M. Hellinger & H. Bußmann (Eds.). Gender across languages (Vol. 1, pp. 1–25). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Holmes, J. (2001a). A corpus-based view of gender in New Zealand English. In M. Hellinger & H. Bußmann (Eds.). Gender across languages (Vol. 1, pp. 115–136). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Holmes, J. (2001b). Ladies and gentlemen: corpus analysis and linguistic sexism. In C. Mair & M. Hundt (Eds.), Corpus linguistics and linguistic theory (pp. 141–156). Amsterdam: Rodopi.   
Holmes, J., & Meyerhoff, M. (Eds.). (2003). The handbook of language and gender. Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.   
Huddleston, R. D., & Pullum, G. K. (2002). The Cambridge grammar of the English language. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Kramarae, C., & Treichler, P. (1985). A feminist dictionary. London: Pandora Press.   
Litosseliti, L., & Sunderland, J. (Eds.). (2002). Gender identity and discourse analysis. Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
McConnell-Ginet, S. (2003). ‘‘What is a name?’’ Social labeling and gender practices. In J. Holmes & M. Meyerhoff (Eds.), The handbook of language and gender (pp. 69–97). Oxford: Blackwell Publishing.   
Meyerhoff, M. (1987). Language and sex: research in New Zealand. In A. Pauwels (Ed.), Women and language in Australian and New Zealand society (pp. 32–44). Sydney: Australian Professional Publications.   
Nelson, M. (2006). Semantic associations in Business English: A corpus-based analysis. English for Specific Purposes, 25, 217–234.   
Nickerson, C. (2005). English as a lingua franca in international business contexts. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 367–380.   
Pauwels, A. (1998). Women changing language. London and New York: Longman.   
Quirk, R., Greenbaum, S., Leech, L., & Svartvik, J. (1985). A comprehensive grammar of the English language. London: Longman.   
Romaine, S. (2001). A corpus-based view of gender in British and American English. In M. Hellinger & H. Bußmann (Eds.). Gender across languages (Vol. 1, pp. 153–175). Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.   
Sunderland, J. (2004). Gendered discourses. New York: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Velasco-Sacrista´n, M., & Fuertes-Olivera, P. A. (2006). Towards a critical cognitive-pragmatic approach to gender metaphors in Advertising English. Journal of Pragmatics, 38, 1982–2002.