# Suitability of science & technology documentaries for EAP and EST listening

Milica Vukovic-Stamatovic

University of Montenegro, Danila Bojovica bb Niksic, Montenegrc

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Science and technology documentaries   
Lexical level   
Academic vocabulary   
Technical vocabulary   
Lexical density   
Speech rate

Selecting English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Science and Technology (EST) listening materials is a challenging task as many different criteria could inform that choice. This study examines the suitability of science and technology documentaries for EAP and EST listening based on a corpus of 100 such documentaries. Departing from the premise that criteria such as thematic suitability, appeal and visual support for the vocabulary presented, as well as the fact that they are delivered in standard English, might recommend science and technology documentaries for this purpose, we further explore their lexical profile, lexical density and speech rate, so as to pass a more informed judgement in this regard. The results obtained are compared against those for academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular. They show that science and technology documentaries may be reasonably followed with a vocabulary size of 3,000 to 4,000 words, similar to what is required for lectures. Additionally, this genre is a good source of academic and technical vocabulary. Its higher lexical density is compensated by its slower delivery than that of lectures. Based on this, we support the inclusion of science and documentary films as EAP and EST materials.

# 1. Introduction

Many English Language Teaching (ELT) professonals prefer to include authentic teaching and learning materials in their lessons (Reppen, 2010) and such materials are particularly in demand in teaching English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Science and Technology (EST) (cf. Benavent & Penamaria, 2011). Thus, EAP and EST instructors and material developers ofen find themselves in a chllenging situation of having to select adequate authentic materials (cf. Parkinson, 2000; Parkinson & Adendorf 2004; Parkinson et l., 2007; Ye, 2020), including those intended for cassroom listening exercises or those recommended for extensive listening at home (Takaesu, 2013; Ye, 2021). On the one hand, these materials need to met certain vocabulary demands (Newton & Nation, 2020). Firs, their vocabulary must be within the grasp of the target students - a high-level of vocabulary in documentaries used in classhas been found to cause frustration among low-level students (Jurkovic, 2013; waffar & Vlatten, 1997). In addition, the materials intended for EAP instruction need to cover academic vocabulary to a sufficient degre, whereas those intended for EST classes also need to cover some more specialised, technical vocabulary. On the other hand, when it comes to selecting listning materials speificll, one neds to take ino count how lexically dense thedelivery in question is, as well as how fast it is paced, given that too much information or speech delivered within a certain timeframe could pose an impediment for some learners (Wingrove, 2017). Moreover, the materials need to be as interesting as possible, as their appeal may conriute to learners motivation for learning.

These are just some of the main criteria one should have in mind when selecting EAP and EST materials, which makes that proces not only challenging but also time-consuming (cf. Lopez-Carril, Ano, & Gonzalez-Serrano, 2020).

Corpus-based investigation into genres which may be included in teaching and learning materials can significantly help ELT professionals and this is what the preset study seeks to accomplish - exploring the suitabilit of one particular genre, science and technology documentaries, which can be considered for use in EAP and EST instruction. As such, this study istuated within a recent and growing line of similar research - some examples of this type of research include Csomay and Petrovic's investigation into legal vocabulary contained in disciline-related movies and TV shows to judge their suitabilit for Legal English classe (2012), Wingrove's study into using TED talks for academic listening (2017), Rolls and Rodger's exploration of the suitabilit of science fiction-fantasy for ESP clases (2017), Hiltunen and Tyrkko study of academic vocabulary in Wikipedia articles (2018), Dang's analys on the presence of specialised vocabulary in medical TV programmes (2020), etc.

The potential of using documentary films in general in ELT is vast (Soong, 2012) and has been explored in several studies such as Rodgers (2018), Peters and Webb (2018), and Peters (2019). Rodgers found that documentaries are a go0d input for vocabulary learning given that \*the same referent i likely to be tlked about for a prolonged time\* (2018: 205) and that, in them, as much as $6 5 \%$ of the imagery occurs simultaneously with its aural presentation, while some $7 0 \%$ of it occurs in the close proximity of the target words it is asociated with and whose learning it may support. These percentages were more than double those Rodgers found for narrative TV genres. This feature of documentaries is especially important in the light of Peters finding (2019) that words accompanied by on-screen imagery are almost three times more likely to be learned compared to those not accompanied by the supporting imagery. Peters (2019) further argues that this combination of word repetitions and the acompanying imagery that characterises TV documentaries makes them a good source for vocabulary learning. In addition, Peters and Web find that exposing learners to a single 1-h documentary episode leads to their learning four new words on average and conclude that TV viewing can be "a fruitful method for increasing a learner's vocabulary knowledge" (2018: 24). In addition, documentary films have been found to improve student engagement and learning in ELT (Zakharova, 2017). Not only can a documentary film be motivating and entertaining in terms of its content and presentation, but it could also be "a profoundly engaging tool for rasing awarenes of vital isues impacting the world today" (Koprowski, 2013, p. 63).

As a subtype of TV documentaries, science and technology documentaries belong to popular science discourse, which is "a key element of academic discourse (Hyland, 2009, p. 173), given its widespred dissemination and the fact that i exercises a considerable influence on personal and public conceptions, as wel as public debates about science. Bearing this in mind, aplied linguists have shown an interest in popular science genres as they have sought to improve the teaching of language for academic and specific purposes (Myers, 2003; Parkinson & Adendorff, 2004; Parkinson et al., 2007).

Science and technology documentaries are produced for a range of audiences who do not have a professional need for information about science but want to keep up with the laes scientifi developments Hyland, 2009; 2010). They typicall deliver linear, didactic tales, in expository and explanatory modes (Van Dijck, 2006), which focus on \*establishing the novelty and relevance of a topic to celebrate scintific reults, wth their validity taken for granted (yland, 2010, p. 119). They have a strongly narrative storyline, often delivered in the form f a detective story (Curtis, 1994; Dugan, 2014), to make the roces of scientific dicovery more interesting and entertaining. This i one of the resons why this genre is very popular -for example, thanks to them, the Discovery Channel has become the most widely distributed cable network in the USA (Hyland, 2009, p. 159).

The above characteristics could make science and technology documentaries good candidates for use in EAP and EST instruction. However, a few additional questions should be addressed before passing a more informed judgement in this regard. These questions include: How lexically demanding are science and technology documentaries? For what English levelof students can they be used best? How much specialised, both academic and technical vocabulary, do they contain? How lexically dense are they? Is their pace of delivery suitable for EAP/EST learners? The goal of this study is to answer these questions which are broadly concerned with two issues that of this genre's vocabulary make-up and that of the information load delivere in them. Based on the answers found to these questions, we will make some pedagogical recommendations regarding their use as EAP and EST listening materials.

# 2. Background

In this part of the paper we review how the vocabulary profil of texs and speech, as well a specialised vocabularys representation in them, may be determined using a corpus-based methodology. Additionall, we deal with the ssue of determining the information load of speech through two linguistic measures - exical density and speech rate. We also present some previous studies which have explored the suitability of some genres for ELT purposes.

# 2.1. Lexical profiling and specialised vocabulary

Lexical profiling, a method and approach first devised by Laufer and Nation (1995), determines the distribution of words in a corpus basd on ther frequency in reference corpora. reting such lexical profile i useul for etablishing the vocabulary level ofte text analysed, how many words are required for its comprehension, how much specialised vocabulary it contains, how suitable it is for various reading and listening purposes, etc. (Nurmukhamedov & Webb, 2019). The text analysed is loaded into a lexical profiling software, together with a choice of word liss, depending on the goals of the text analysis. Various corpus-based word lists have ben produced for lexical profiling research and ELT instruction purposes.

The history of corpus-based word lists dates back as far as 1953, the year in which West manuall produced the General Service List (GSL) from his 5-million-word corpus for details explaining how Wests word list (1953) was manually produced from acorpus, see

Gilner (2011). This ist, containing about 2,000 word families, was considered to represent the most frequent words of English, and thus the words which should first be taught in ELT. For many decades it sccessullyserved this purpose, whilein recent times newer lists have been produced, based on substantially larger corpora and by employing much more scientific rigour. For instance, Brezina and Gablasova (2015) and Browne et al. (2013) created two such lis. They are both of approximately the same size as the original GSL and are both called the New GSL (NGsL). Expectedly, they outperform the old lists in more recent corpora to a certain degree, according to their creators' reports. Given their size, these lists are mostly intended for EFL/ESL instruction, although measuring their coverages in various corpora can provide indications as to the lexical level of these corpora - generally, the more words of a corpus come from these lists, the lower the lexical demand of the corpus.

Unlike these standalone lists, which comprise only the most frequent vocabulary of English, Nation (2012) produced a set of 25 word lists, representing the most frequent 25,00 word families of English. Aditionally, Nation provide four accompanying word lists containing proper names, marginal words, compounds without a hyphen, and abbreviations. This set may be used for instructional purposes ut itis also very sutable for use in lxical rearch ue to its comprhensivenes. Iti ad n two lare corpora: the Corpus of Contemporary American English (COCA) and the British National Corpus (BNC). The most frequent BNC/cCOCA 2,000 word families better represent general high-frequency words than the two New-GSL lists referred to above (Dang et al., 2020; Dang & Webb, 2016) The coverage of ation's word is set may offer useful insights into the lexical make-up f corpora, especially when combined withthe knowledge of how much word coverage i needed for reading and istening comprehension. Acording to Laufer (1989), readers should know at least $9 5 \%$ of the words used in a text for its reasonable comprehension, while Nation (2006, 2013) argues that at least $9 8 \%$ of the words should be familiar to a reader for its ideal comprehension. Van Zeeland and Schmitt (2013) conducted a series of experi. ments to establish the coverage thresholds for listening comprehension and concluded that $9 5 \%$ coverage is needed for 'adequate' comprehension (good, but not necessarily complete comprehension' (Van Zeeland & Schmit, 2013: 475) achieved by most isters. Additionally, they also established that $9 0 \%$ coverage led to successful listening comprehension for many experiment participants When listening to \*informal narratives", although the scores varied more for this figure than for the one cited above. They also found that $9 8 \%$ coverage, established for ideal reading comprehension, may be too inflated when applied to listening. Subsequent studies (Durbahn et al., 2020; Giordano, 2021) also support the relevance of $9 0 \%$ and $9 5 \%$ coverages for audio and audiovisual input. Knowing how many words are needed to reach comprehension helps determine the level of learners for whom a certain text may be suitable.

Apart from these general-purpose word lists, some researchers have produced more specialised word lists. A series of word ists containing the most frequent academic vocabulary include the Academic Word List (AWL) created by Coxhead in 2000; the New AWL (Browne et al., 2014); the Academic Vocabulary List (AVL), produced by Gardner and Davies (2014); and the Academic Spoken Word List (ASWL), generated by Dang et al. (2017). Dang et al.'s ASWL (2017) is the most relevant for our present research, given that it represents spoken English as delivered in academic settings. This list was derived from a 13-million-word corpus, containing speech transcripts from 24 different academic subjects It was built from scratch', meaning that no group of words was excluded prior to establishing the word list (unlike the AWL and the New AWL, which were derived from the words outside the GSL and new GSL, respectively). The ASWL contains 1,741 word families, which cover $9 0 . 1 3 \%$ of the corpus they came from. Dang et al. compared it to the AWL and the AVL, another recent word list representing written academic language, and found that i strongly outperformed them in spoken academic English.

Likewise, a series of word lists which are based on more specialised corpora, typicall from one or several closely related disci. plines, have emerged over the past few decades. Among them is the EAP Science List (EAP SL) by Coxhead and Hirsh (2007), which was obtained by first excluding the most frequent general and academic words (the GSL and the AWL). This seres also includes the word lists for pharmacology (Fraser, 2007), medicine (Lei & Liu, 2016; Wang et al, 2008), engineering (Ward, 2009), chemistry (Valipouri & Nassaji, 2013), environmental science (Liu & Han, 2015), linguistics (Moini & Islamizadeh, 2016), spoken hard science (Dang, 2018), etc. The most relevant of these word is for our present research is the Hard Science Spoken Word List (HswL), created by Dang (2018), from a 6.5-million token corpus of transcripts from 12 discipline. This word listfeature 1,595 word families which are the most frequent in hard science speech, covering $9 0 . 9 4 \%$ of the words in the corpus it was derived from.

All specialised lists can be used to instructional purposes, either as guides for currcula and textboos or as standalone vocabulary resources, but they could also be used for the purpose of selecting teaching and learning materials. Namely, by checking their coverages in candidat texts we can conclude how valuable these texts are in terms of the vocabulary they contain and how their lexical profile fares against some other relevant genres.

# 2.2. Information load

As suggested by Wingrove (2017), when determining the suitability of some genres for listening, one should also look into their information load, i.e. how lexically dense they are and how much speech is delivered per a unit of time (speech rate).

Lexical density is calculated by dividing the total number of lexical, i.e. content words, by the total number of words in a text (Stubbs, 1986). Lexical words - nouns, verbs, adjectives and adverbs, are differentiated from functional words such as prepositions and articles. exical densit i used as "an indication of how much information the listener s required to proces within a given timeframe" (Wingrove, 2017, p. 81). In his study, Wingrove (2017) finds that the lexical density in the Yale lecture series is $4 7 . 1 1 \%$ , similar to that he found for his corpus of TED talks -- $4 7 . 2 8 \%$ . Other results from the literature, inter alia, include those from Stubbs (1986), who found a lexical density of $4 0 { - } 6 5 \%$ for non-fiction texts and $4 0 { - } 5 4 \%$ for fiction texts; Ure's finding (1971) that speech generally features a lexical density below $4 0 \%$ ; and Nesi's (2001) result for academic lectures $( 4 9 \% )$

Speech rate measures how fast speech is delivered per a unit of time, which may be syllables per second or words per minute. Wingrove (2017) reports that the speech rate in his lecture series was 3.52 s.p.s or 144.79 w.p.m., somewhat lower than what he ound for TED talks (4.01 s ps or 169 w.p.m). Tauroza and Allison (1990) provide more data for spech rate in various genres: for radio broadcast, the speech rate was 160 w.p.m., for conversation it was 210 w.p.m., for interviews it was 190 w.p.m., while for lectures it was 140 w.p.m., which is comparatively close to Wingrove's finding of 144.79 w.p.m. and Nesi's finding of 150 w.p.m. for the same genre.

Nesi (2001) further studied the relationship between lexical density and speech rate in academic lectures. She found a negative correlation between lexical density and speech rate, meaning that faster peech tended to be less exically dense and vice versa.

# 2.3. Suitability of some genres for ELT purposes

A number rent studies have tried to detemine the suitabilit of texts from some particular genres for ET or, more pecifically, for EAP or some EST fields.

Csomay and Petrovic (2012) explored the specialised, i. legal vocabulary, in movies and TV shows on legal topics, so as to judge how suitable they were for use in Legal English teaching and learning. Their results confirmed that these indeed bear a potential for incidental learning of specialised vocabulary given that they contain a solid share of technical, legal terms $( 6 . 2 \% )$ and that most of them could be encountered more than 10 times in these movies and shows.

As suggested earlier, Wingrove (2017) studied the suitability of TED talks for academic listening. He studied threeapects of his corpus of TED talks in terms of which he compared it against a corpus of academic lectures. First, hestudied the presence f academic vocabulary in his corpus of TED talks, using the AVL as a representative word list. Wingrove opted for this lis because of its recency, even though it was derived from a corpus of written academic English, bearing in mind that spoken academic word lists were not available at the time of his study. The next aspect studied was the lexical density of hs corpus, compared to that of academic lectures. Finally, Wingrove studied the sech rate in his two corpora. It was concluded that TED talk could be used successully to a wide range of academic listening purposes.

Rolls and Rodgers (2017) examined the coverage of the EAP Science List (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007) in a corpus of science fiction-fantasy texts, in order to examine whether this genre may be sutableas source of science-specific vocabulary for ES learners. They found this list to cover $0 . 5 0 \%$ in a corpus of science fiction-fantasy texts, based on which they concluded that science fiction-fantasy may serve as a "bridge resource for those studying English as a foreign language who specialise in science.

Hiltunen and Tyrkko (2018) studied the representation of the AWL (Coxhead, 2000) in Wikipedia artice and concluded that many of them resembled academic prose to a great degree. Using the same word list the representation of academic vocabulary was also studied by McQuillan (2020), but in a different genre. Namely, McQullan studied the Harry Pottr novels in terms of their repre. sentation of academic vocabulary and found that they covered as much as $8 5 \%$ of this type of vocabulary, which recommended them for EAP extensive reading.

Hsu's (2018) study showed that the Voice of America News reading materials are useful for acquiring mid-frequency vocabulary in EFL/ESL learners, as are the transcripts of TED talks (Hsu, 2020). To arrive at these conclusions, Hsu applied Nation's (2012) word list set, referred to above, to measure the vocabulary load of his corpus.

Dang (2020) analysed the presence of specialised vocabulary in medical TV programmes, so as to assess their potential for inci dental learning of this type of vocabulary. She firs created a Medical Spoken Word List containing 895 word types from a medical lectures and seminars corpus of more than half a million words. The coverage of thi it was then tested in acorpus of 37 medical TV programmes. The results pointed to a great potentil of tis type of programmes for enig specialised vocabulary, particular f hey are watched regularly.

Vukovic-Stamatovic (2020a) studied the lexical profile of seven physics genres (physics research articles, magazine articles, textbooks, popular books, TED talks, academic lectures, and documentary films) and their suitability for academic istening and reading in English for Physics. For this purpose, the author also used Nation's (2012) word list set as wellas calculated the presence of academic vocabulary as represented by the AWL) and of the more specialised, scientific vocabulary as represented by the Science ist (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007). Similarly, Vukovic-Stamatovic (2020b) studied the vocabulary profile of science popular books for English for Science classes and found that this gere featured arather ignficant amount f academic vocabulary (the coverage of the AWL was $5 . 3 2 \%$ and scientific vocabulary (the SL covered $1 . 5 1 \%$

As can be seen, most of the studies described above focused on the vocabulary suitability of certain genres - some of them focused on the vocabulary level needed to reach reading/listening comprehension, while some focused on the presence of specialised vocabulary, academic and/or more technical vocabulary, opting for various word lists to determine its representation in the texts analysed. A number of studies encompassed both these aspects. However, Wingrove's study (2017) proved to be the most compre hensive, as it also studied the information load of the genre in question, a criterion that should not be overlooked when judging the suitability of texts for listening purposes. Bearing all this in mind, it is Wingrove's model that we wil apply in this study, with some modifications and additions, which we hope will improve this methodological framework for our present purposes.

# 3. Aim and research questions

The aim of this paper is to determine how suitable science and technology documentaries are for EAP and EST instruction, respectively. This aim will be fulfilled by answering the following research questions:

1. How many words are needed to reach adequate istening comprehension (as defined by Van Zeeland & Schmitt 2013) in science and technology documentaries in comparison with academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular?   
2. How much specialised vocabulary do science and technology documentaries contain in comparison with academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular?   
3. What is the lexical density of science and technology documentaries in comparison with academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular?   
4. How similar is the speech rate of science and technology documentaries to that of academic lectures?

The first pair of questions sees to explore the vocabulary profile of science and technology documentaries, while the second se of questions loks into the information load of this genre. In both these aspect, science and technology documentaries are compared to academic lectures, both the general ones and those on science topics, given that our goal is to explore the suitability of this genre for both EAP and EST purposes.

# 4. Data and the methodological framework

This subsection of the paper gives the corpora details, as wel as the analytical steps and procedures used to answer the set research questions.

# 4.1. Corpora

The data used in this study are the following:

1. A corpus of 100 recent science and technology documentaries collcted for this study. The corpus contains the English captions of these documentaries. In their selection we mostly followed earlier studies (Dang, 2020; Webb & Rodgers, 2009a) and therefore considered two main criteria the popularity of the documentaries and the availabilit of English subtitles. The documentaries come from two major and very popular broadcasting companies: half the documentaries (50) are National Geographic (NG) docu. mentaries, comprising a total of 282,599 tokens, while the other half (50) are the British Broadcasting Company (BC) production, encompassing atotal of 330,413 tokens; thus, the entire corpus consists of 613,012 tokens. Some of the documentary tite include. A day in the Earth life Alan Turing; How to se a black hole; The secret life of your body-clock; How science changed our world; Human brain: how smart can we get?; Tails you win: the science of chance; The beginning and end of the universe; How to build a nuclear submarine; Light and dark; Renewable energy; Eugenics: science's greatest scandal; Understanding viruses. The production years of the documentaries range from 2008 to 2020.   
2. The British Academic Spoken English (BASE) corpus? of 160 academic lectures, totalling 1,274,913 tokens. We chose this rather than the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) corpus based on the fact that the BASE is the larger of the two and that it consequently had a much larger cience lectures subsection. In addition, the speech rate data for 30 lectures from this corpus are already available in the literature (Nesi, 2001).   
3. The BASE corpus subsection of 80 academic ectures from the fields of ife and Medical Sciences, and Physical Sciences, which are topic-wise the closest to science and technology documentaries. This BASE corpus' subsection contains 583,434 tokens.

# 4.2. Data analysis

To answer the first two research questions, we employ the Lexical Frequency Profiling method (Laufer & Nation, 1995), referred to earlier. As explained, the method implies loading word lists into a lexical profiling computer programme, as well as a corpus. The software then provides the coverage of the loaded word lists in the corpus used. The lexical profiling software used here is AntWordProfilr 1.4.1 (Anthony, 2014). The word lists used in this study are the following (allof them were briefly described insection 2.1):

As regards the first research question, the coverages obtained for Nation's word list set are compared with two listening comprehension thresholds relevant for listening comprehension, arrived at by Van Zeeland and Schmitt (2013): the $9 0 \%$ coverage ensuring adequate comprehension for many listeners and the $9 5 \%$ coverage ensuring adequate comprehension for most listeners. This will enable us to know how many words are needed for these levels of comprehension in science & technology documentaries as opposed to academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular.

The second research question refers to the specialised vocabulary representation in our corpora. To calculate the presence of ac. ademic vocabulary, Wingrove (2017) used the AVL, a word lis representing a written academic corpus, given that at the time of publishing his result, no spoken academic word list was available. As one is now available (the AswL, Dang etal., 2017), it only makes sense to use it as diffences betwen spoken and wten acadmic gres in terms of the leve of the spilised vocabulary have been noted in the iterature (Vukovic-Stamatovic, 2020a). As our goals in this study encompass the suitability of science & technology documentaries for EST in particular, we also used Dang's Hard Science Spoken Word List (HswL) (2018b). This ist was built from scratch and it encompasses the most frequent words used in spoken hard science. To further profile some more technical vocabulary which is generally outside the most frequent word bands, we used the EAP Science List (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007). The limitation of this word list is that comes from written academic language; however, its advantage for our particular purpose is that it was built on top of the most frequent general and academic words (the GSL and the AWL), which is why i is more technical in nature than the lists above.

To answer the third research question, as Wingrove (2017), we used the online software Analyze my Writing (http://www. analyzemywriting.com/index html), which calculates the ratio between lexical (content) words and the total number of words in a corpus. We then compared the lexical density in science and technology documentaries against that from academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular.

Finally, to respond to the fourth research question, we compared the spech rate in cience and technology documentaries to that in academic lectures. The BAsE lectures recordings were not available online but, fortunately, the speech rate for them has already been reported by Nesi (2001), which is why we use her figures for comparison. Nesi used 5-min samples taken from the middle sections of 30 BASE lectures after the announcements but before the concluding summaries). We also took the same number of 5-min samples,from the middle part of the documentaries (the samples were randomly taken from somewhere etween the 15th and the 35th minut of the documentary). Given that TV documentaries also contain music and speech pauses for viewers to reflect on the content and the im agery, these needed to be subtracted. Following the methodology used in the seminal paper by Tauroza and Allison (1990), we deducted all speechless periods larger than 3 s, i.e. we considered such periods as interruptions and excluded them from the data. Syllables and words were counted using the Syllable Count software (available at htps://ww.syllablecount.com/), as in Wingrove (2017), and the results are presented in two formats: words per minute (wpm) and syllables per second (sps).

# 5. Results

# 5.1. Vocabulary level

As explained earlier, to calculate the vocabulary level of our corpora we used Nation's word list set derived from the combined corpus of BNC and COCA (2012) - the results are reported in Table 1 below. Apart from the word frequency bands, we used two of his supplementary lists: proper names and marginal words. The ltter chiefly refers to the ltters of the alphabet, which are typically used as symbols in equations, formulae and measurements $( \mathbf { x } , \mathbf { y } , { \mathbf { a } } , { \mathbf { C } } , \mathrm { H } , { \mathbf { O } } , \mathrm { m } , 1 , { \mathbf { s } } \ldots )$ , and which thus make up a significant portion of the words in academic lectures (as opposed to our documentaries, where they only make up $0 . 1 5 \%$ of the words). Both these word lists were used by Dang and Webb (2014) in their lexical profiling study of the BASE corpus, for the same reason.

As explained earlier, $9 0 \%$ coverage ensures adequate comprehension for many listeners (Van Zeeland & Schmitt, 2013). As may be seen in Table 1,as few as 2,000 word families (lus proper nouns and marginal words) are needed to comprehend academic lectures from the BASE corpus, while some more are needed for both science and technology documentaries and the BASE subsection consisting of lectures from life, medical and physical sciences.

Also as indicated earlier, $9 5 \%$ coverage ensures adequate listening comprehension for most listeners (Van Zeeland & Schmitt, 2013). By applying this threshold against the results presented in Table 1, we conclude that the most frequent 4,00 word families are needed for the listning comprehension of science and technology documentary films, and for science lectures, while some fewer words, .. 3,000 word families, are needed to understand academic lectures in general. 3,000 word families are generall needed to understand spoken English (Nation, 2006), as wel as movies (Webb & Rodgers, 2009b), and our results are, thus, consistent with these When it comes to the ocabulary demands of academic lectures in general at the same time, however, our results pont to some more than average lexical demands which are placed in science spoken genres.

Taking both the above vocabulary coverage thresholds into acount, the vocabulary demands of science and technology documentaries, and science lectures are the same. Our results, therefore, speak in favour of using science and technology documentaries as EAP and EST listening materials.

Below is a short extract from our corpus of documentaries, given for illustration purposes - the indices mark the level of words, i. 1" marks a word which belongs to the most frequent 1,00 words of English, 2" marks a word from the second most frequent 1,000 words of English, etc. The words outside the first 2,o00 words are shown in bold:

Table 1 Vocabulary level $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>BNC/COCA word lists</td><td>Science &amp; tech. documentaries (cum.) coverage %)</td><td>BASE academic lectures (cum. coverage %)</td><td>BASE life, medical &amp; physical sciences lectures (cum. coverage %)</td></tr><tr><td>Proper names (PN)</td><td>1.6</td><td>1.1</td><td>0.35</td></tr><tr><td>Marginal words (mw)</td><td>1.75</td><td>4.32</td><td>3.71</td></tr><tr><td>1,000 + PW + MW</td><td>81.17</td><td>84.08</td><td>83.5</td></tr><tr><td>2,000 + PW + MW</td><td>88.78</td><td>90.37</td><td>89.49</td></tr><tr><td> 3,000 + PW + MW</td><td>93.78</td><td>95.06</td><td>94.2</td></tr><tr><td>4,000 + PW + MW</td><td>95.78</td><td>96.27</td><td>95.58</td></tr><tr><td> 5,000 + PW + MW</td><td>96.81</td><td>96.92</td><td>96.39</td></tr><tr><td>6,000 + PW + MW</td><td>97.43</td><td>97.29</td><td>96.79</td></tr><tr><td>7,000 + PW + MW</td><td>97.89</td><td>97.57</td><td>97.11</td></tr><tr><td>8,000 + PW + MW</td><td>98.16</td><td>97.77</td><td>97.36</td></tr><tr><td>9,000 + PW + MW</td><td>98.35</td><td>97.91</td><td>97.54</td></tr></table></body></html>

"Wel're' about' to begin' a' journey' that' will take' us' from' the' infinitesimal to' the' infinite, from' the' dawn? of! time' to' the' distant future?. We'll explore galaxies' and suns' and' worlds', surf the' gravity waves' of space'-time. encounter beings' that live in' fire and ice, explore the planets of stars that never' die, discover atoms as massive as! suns' and universes smallerl than' atoms. Cosmos is' also' a story' about us'. It's the' saga of how wandering bands of! hunters' and' gatherers? found' their' way' tol the' stars, one' adventure? with' many' heroes?.

To' make' this' journey?, wel'll need' imagination'. But imagination' alone is' not' enough' because' the' reality of nature! is' far' more wondrous' than' anything' we' can' imaginel. This' adventure? is' made' possble' by' generations? of searchers? strictly adhering' to a' simple' set of rules'. Test ideas' by' experiment and' observation?. Build on' those ideas' that pass! the' test'. Reect? the ones that fal. Fllow' the evidence? wherever it leads' and question' everything'" From Cosmos: A Space-Time Odyssey (2014)).

As can be sen, most words in the extract come from the most frequent 2,00 words of English. However, 18 out of the extract's 166 words are beyond the irst two bands. Four words come from the bands beyond the most frequent 4,0o words of English (infinitesimal, surf, cosmos, and saga), covering $2 . 4 \%$ of the words in this paragraph - a percentage which, generally, should not put at risk the overall comprehension of this extract.

# 5.2. Specialised vocabulary

To calculate the level of specialised vocabulary in our corpora, we used the Academic Spoken Word List (Dang et al., 2017), the Hard Science Spoken Word List (Dang, 2018), and the EAP Science List (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007), s suggested earlier. The results are presented in Table 2 below.

The two spoken word is suggest that science and technology documentaries are very similar to academic lectures in general and science letres in particular, in terms of their most frequent vocabulary. Stil, they feature somewhat les specialise vocabulary than the lectures, about $1 \%$ fewer of such words. The best results of these two lists are scored in life, medical and physical science lectures, which are the most specialised in nature.

The results regarding the coverage of the EAP Science List are very interesting. This list covered almost $4 \%$ in written science academic language (Coxhead & Hirsh, 2007) but, expectedly, much les than that in our spoken corpora - Table 2 shows that in academic lectures in general its coverage is $1 . 0 1 \%$ and that it is significantly larger in science lectures, where it is $1 . 8 2 \%$ . Our results show that sciece and technology documentare are  poorer source of this type of vocabulary than science lectures, but  signficantly better one than academic lectures in general. This finding speaks in faour of using more specialised material sources for EST purposes and that sometimes the genre is les important than the topic of a text. Based on their calculation that the EAP Science List overs $0 . 5 \%$ of the words in science fiction-fantasy texts, Rolls and Rodgers (2017) concluded that particular genre could be used as a bridge resource for science students learning English; compared to that, science and documentary films are almost a three times richer source of this type of vocabulary. We may conclude that science and technology documentaries feature a fair amount of specialised vocabulary, which can justify their use for both EAP and EsT listening. This rlatively high load of specialised words in science and technology documentaries should not pose a significant burden for learners comprehension given our finding above that knowing some 3, 000-4,000 most frequent word of English i sufficient to fllow this gre, the sigficant falitating role of imagry in doumentaries (Rodgers, 2018), and the fact that a considerable proportion of scientific words are, in fact cognates, which belong to the so-called "International Scientific Vocabulary" (Gove, 1968) (cf. Moss, 1992; Quero, 2015), whose meanings Peters and Webb found the easiest for learners to recognise while listening to a documentary (2018: 21).

Again, for llustration purposes, we quote an extract from our documentary corpus. As the ASWL and the HSWL contain the most frequent words and thus cover almost 9 in every 10 words of our corpora, we will here mark the words contained in the EAP SL (using bold), as the most specific f the thre lists used in this subsection, to provide an indication of just how much technical language is

Table 2 Specialised vocabulary $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Specialised word lists</td><td>Science &amp; tech. documentaries (cum. coverage %)</td><td>BASE academic lectures (cum. coverage %)</td><td>BASE life, medical &amp; physical sciences lectures (cum. coverage %)</td></tr><tr><td>Academic Spoken WL</td><td>86.8</td><td>87.7</td><td>87.87</td></tr><tr><td>Hard Science WL</td><td>86.1</td><td>86.87</td><td>87.71</td></tr><tr><td>EAP Science List</td><td>1.44</td><td>1.01</td><td>1.82</td></tr></table></body></html>

present in science and technology documentaries:

"Plants absorb most of the rest of the rainbow, the blue and red photons, and use their energy to power photosynthesis Photosynthesis i the process by which plants harness ight. They are the bridge between nuclear reactions million miles away and life on Earth. Energy released from nuclear fusion reactions in the sun's core heats everything up and shakes electrons around, and those electrons will emit photons, which travel across space for eight minutes, and then hit an electron in a chlorophyll molecule. But instead of that energy being disipated away as heat, chlorophyll i clever, and ultimately the energy imparted to that electron is used to do allsorts of clever things through an intricate piece of machinery. Split water up, force electrons onto carbon dioxide, and ultimately, build sugars, which allows the plant to grow. (From Forces of Nature with Brian Cox (2016))

The science words used in the extract include words such as ectrons and molecule. However, we must bear in mind that specialised word lists typically cover only relatively frequent vocabulary and so is the case with the EAP SL - in the paragraph above, certainly some more words could be profiled as scientific (e.g. chlorophyll and photons). This means that even more technical words may be found in the genre of science and technology documentaries, which could further recommend it for EST listening.

# 5.3. Lexical density

As argued by Wingrove (2017), lexical density is one of the indicators f the information load of texts. Generally, the literature cites that spoken txts are typicaly les dse than wre ones Hlliday, 1989. ur results for the dsity of thecorpor ere analysed are given in Table 3 below.

Science and technology documentaries are much lexically denser than lectures, featuring a density of $5 1 . 3 6 \%$ , which is well above what is expected of spoken texts - as discussed earlier, Ure (1971) found that spoken texts generally have a lexical density lower than $4 0 \%$ However, we must bear in mind that documentaries are scripted talks - basically a genre which is write for speaking, which is Why it is significantl different from spontaneous speech in many respects. Academic lectures are also lexicall denser than everyday spoken genres, being lessontaneous than them- although lectures are not scripted per se, they are, in general, very well prepared in advance.

The lexical density of science and technology documentaries may render them more difficult to understand than spontaneous speech; however, bearing in mind that their vocabulary load is suitable for English learners with a vocabulary size of 4,000 words and the fact that the images strongly support the delivery in this genre (Rodgers, 2018), this rather large lexical density should not represent an insurmountable obstacle for learners. Other factors related to leaners themselves may also help them offset higher lexical density, such as their having a tchnical background or interest or their familiarit with the topics of the doumentaries; additionall, an important factor may also be their first language or any additional foreign languages they may speak. This may be of relevance as the language of science i rich in words of Greek and Latin origin (Gren, 2015). Because of this, learners speaking Romance languages or, in gneral, those well versed in vocabulary of Greek and Latin origin, might have  vocabulary advantage when listening to cience and technology documentaries - they could be able to recognise or guessthe meaning of certain cognates. This advantage would, presumably, be greater when reading documentary transcripts or subtitles rather than just listening to them. Finally, if the documentaries are intended for extensive istening outside the classroom, learners can also take advantage of the play-speed and rewind control functions of their playing devices in order to slow down the recording or repeat some of its segments. Naturall, the genre of science and technology documentaries, as any other genre, may be more suitable for some leaners, while les fr the others, bearing in mind factors such as the above.

Below is another extract from our corpus, with the lexical words marked in bold, so as to provide an indication of their presence in the genre of science and technology documentaries:

Table 3 Lexical density $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Science &amp; tech. documentaries (%)</td><td>BASE academic lectures (%)</td><td>BASE life, medical &amp; physical sciences lectures (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Lexical density(content words/total words)</td><td>51.36</td><td>46.18</td><td>45.88</td></tr></table></body></html>

"Animals travel across the earth in ever-changing formations. Landscapes are constantly altering. One of the reasons mathematics began was because we needed to find a way of making sense of these natural patterns. The most basic concepts of maths - space and quantity - are hard-wired into our brains. Even animals have a sense of distance and number, assessing when their pack is outnumbered, and whether to fight or fl, calculating whether their prey is within striking distance. Understanding maths is the difference between life and death." (From The Story of Maths (2008))

The lexical density of the paragraph quoted above is $5 4 . 1 2 \%$ which makes it relatively representative for the corpus. Among the content words, nouns are the most dominant in the extract - they make up $3 2 . 9 4 \%$ or about one third of the paragraph, while the :emaining content words (adjectives, adverbs and verbs) make up about a fifth of the paragraph.

# 5.4. Speech rate

Our final research question refers to the spech rate in science and technology documentaries, especially in relation to that in academic lectures. The related findings are in Table 4, along with Nesi's (2001) findings for BASE lectures.

The speech rate in science and documentary films (138.17 w.p.m., SD 17.08, or 3.39 s.p.s., $\mathrm { S D } \ 0 . 3 9 )$ is slower than that of academic lctures. The speech rate mean in our corpus is between 132 w.p.m. and 145 w.p.m., based on 30 samples, which suggests some variation, but not that substantial;, Nesi (2001) reported much more variation for academic lectures. This scripted genre is typically carefully paced, giving readers time to absorb what is said - a somewhat slower pech rat certainly makes this gere easier tofollow.

Our finding is consistent with Tauroza and Allison's (1990) observation that scripted genres have a slower speech rate than spontaneous speech. Nesi's (2001) result that speech rate negatively correlates with lexical density has also been confirmed here a rather high lexical density of science and technology documentaries is accompanied by their somewhat slower speech rate.

In response to the fourth research question we may say that the speech rate of science and technology documentaries should pose no obstacle for English language learners.

# 6. Summary

In this paper, we explored a corpus of 100 science and technology documentaries by comparing their lexical profile, lexical density and speech rate, to those of academic lectures in general and science lectures in particular. The purpose of this comparison was to asses the suitaility of this genre for AP and EST listening. For our comparison corpus we used BASE lectures and its science lectures subsection. The vocabulary load of science and technology documentaries proved very similar to them - 3,00 words were found to be necessary for adequate comprehension of this genre for many learners, while 4,000 words were needed to achieve this level of comprehension for most leaners. Next, this genre proved to be rlatively rich in specialised academic and more technical vocabulary. Its speech rate was somewhat slower than that found for lectures. Finally, the genre turned out to be rather lexically dense.

# 7. Pedagogical recommendations

Based on the results presented above, science and technology documentaries can be recommended for both EAP and EST listening, as they display great similarities in their leical profileto academic lectres in general and science lectures in particular, both in terms of their ocabulary level, but also in terms of the presence of the more pecialised vocabulary. If he vocabulary level of the students is not familiar to the instructor prior to commencing using this genre for listening materials, we can recommend that they test ther learners' vocabulary sizes. This is possble using the Vocabulary Levels Tests (originall created by Nation (1983), many of which are available online. As suggested by the findings of this study, science and technology documentaries may not be suitable for many learners who do not have sufficient knowledge of the most frequent 3,oo words of English. lso, as mentioned earlie, speakers of Greek or Romance languages could have a vocabulary advantage as scientific English abounds in terminology originating from these languages.

The instructors and the listening material developers should bear in mind that science and documentary films are a scripted genre and as such they feature a rather high lexical density, which is why playing them as videos is recommended - the images facilitate understanding (Peters, 2019; Rodgers, 2018), as does their somewhat slower speech rate, which was here found suitable for language learners.

Some other recommendations as to the specifics on how to use TV documentarie for English vocabulary learning purposes may be found in the literature. Thus, they may be recommended both for classoom listening exercises (typicall in the form of excerpts, as shown by Peters (2019), who found vocabulary gains from exposing learners to 12-min documentary excerpts), or for extensive listening at home (the value of which was shown by Peters and Webb (2018), who exposed students to a whole documentary episode). Moreover, Peters (2019) suggests playing them with captions, to ensure best vocabulary gains. Further research is needed, however, to provide more detailed recommendations as to how to best integrate this genre in EAP and EST materials, respectively.

Table 4 Speech rate $( \% )$   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Speech rate</td><td>Science &amp; tech. documentaries (no. 30)</td><td>BASE academic lectures (no. 30) (Nesi, 2001)</td><td>BASE science lectures (no. 10) Nesi (2001)</td></tr><tr><td>Words per minute</td><td>138.17</td><td>150</td><td>146</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 8. Conclusion

The vocabulary profile and the speech rate of science and technology documentaries recommend them for use as EAP and EST listening material. However, instructors and material developers need to bear in mind that sience and technology documentaries are rather lexically dense.

Some limitations of this study should be addressed at this point as well. Namely, the present study was performed using quantitative methods. The suitability of science and technology documentarie for EAP and EST listening may also be asessed using other methods including the analysis of lexical bundles or by using them in classand surveying both teachers and learners on their suitability or testing how learners coped with them. As suggested earlier, this genre could be more suitable for some learners and less or others, depending on personal characteristics of learners such as their having a technical background or an interest in science and technology, their being familiar with the documentaries topics, or their speaking other languages, especially Greek or Romance languages. The role of factors such as these in judging the suitabilit of science and technology documentarie for particular groups of learners could be further explored in future research.

Despite the said limitations, taking into account the previous findings regarding the use of documentaries for the English language teaching and learning (Peters, 2019; Peters & Web, 2018; Rodgers, 2018) and considering the findings of our study, we support the inclusion of science and documentary films in both EAP and EST listening materials.

# Author statement

As I am the only author of this paper, al role and credit in the process of concetalising, writing and revising the paper belong to me. The author. Milica Vukovic-Stamatovic.

# Appendix A. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2022.101137.

# References

Benavent, ., & Pmari, s. . 2011. se f athtic tril in the ESP o. Enr, 20, 9-94. ht://d hdent/10017/10109.   
Br 5 t  t 1)  g 10.1093/applin/amt018   
Browe,  llig  Phlip, . 03).he   e ist h//cist. Aber 2019)   
Brone,    hi 014 e    ist h/ig--dit.e September 2019).   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TEs0L, 34(2), 213-238. https://doi.org/10.2307/3587951   
007.  c i.   siqq , 5-8. //917/2.05   
Csomay  ovic, 2012 , or honor! s- tdy f tch aul ciinead mvie ad shs. st 40, 305-315. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2012.05.004   
urtis  (1ie  ie       f   6./77 030631279402400301   
ang, .. 018  ci d is.    c, 61),471. /..075/.0.an   
Dang, T .. 2020he l or  i y  sit  an  h -ela pogram Insights from medical corpora. Tesol Quarterly, 54(2), 436-459. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.552   
Dang, . ed,   W, . (2017). he adc soke word ist nge Lng, 67(4), 959-997. htps:/i.g/10.11/ng,12253   
Dng    014h f  s.gs    ./g/1016/013.08.00   
ang, T   . 016). ig is o hg- s.  i J of p sic 672 13-158. /i. 10.1075/itl.167.2.02dan   
Dg          ti . doi.org/10.1177/1362168820911189   
Dugan, D.2014 cie try ting in dntri. A Hsria de  i de cca 5-49. p/i.org0.2436/20.2006.01.183   
Durbahn, M ors,  Per,  (2020 The reltioship betw abulry ad vig comprehsion. Syst 88,113. h/o.g/10.1016/. system.2019.102166 Education, 10, 127-143.   
Gardner, D., & Davies, M. (2014). A new academic vocabulary list Applied Lingustic, 353), 305-327 htps://do.org/10.1093/applin/amt015   
Gilner, L. 2011. A primer on the general service lis. Rding in a Foreign Languge, 23(1, 65-83.https:/di.og/10.1057/97811372762854   
Giordano, M. J. (2021). Lexical coverag in dialoge istening. Language Teching Rearch, 1-28. htps:/doi.g/10.1177/1362168821989869   
Green, T. M. (2015). The Greek & Latin roots of English. Rowman & Littlefield.   
Halliday, M. (1989). Spoken and written language. OUP.   
H  . 018.   n  Fy   .  r, t a. ., evidence in English Language research (pp. 282-306). Brill. https://doi.org/10.1163/9789004390652_013.   
Hsu, W. (2018). e f Amricaws as vlous rd matri fr id-qey vauly g RE Jol, 503), 408421. htps/oi.r 10.1177/0033688218764460 10.15639/teflinjournal.v31i2/181-203   
Hyland, K. (2o09). Academic discourse: English in a global context. London: Continuum.   
Hyland, 010i g    r     h r c P , 11627. /. org/10.1016/jjeap.2010.02.003   
Juic,.013h mi- ti. .) conference: Proceedings (pp. 200-217). Piri Reis University. https://doi.org/10.13140/2.1.2267.6167.   
Koprowski,. 2013. dng the r sill to  . d,  l. (.), The 2013f pn . 63-71) JA PanSIG.   
Laer, . (199 f      .)   n thng machines (pp. 316-323). Multilingual Matters.   
Laer,  o 199. i   ri   tio sic 63, 0-2./.10.1093 applin/16.3.30   
Lei L   (016 mal  d ist co-  h  m. sh for c P, 1) 2-53./ doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2016.01.008   
Li, J.    015. - l a wd ist g d ts vlt et h for i e , 111/i.g 10.1016/j.esp.2015.03.001   
Lo-a -      me and LinkedIn. Sustainability, 12(23), Article 10161. https:/doi.org/10.3390/su122310161   
McQulla . (0 y er an the priorf vay inti: qrn  ga war. g n  , 2) 122-142. http://hdl.handle.net/10125/67377.   
Mo, R6     ks 5 (3), 65-90. https://doi.org/10.22099/jtls.2016.3901   
os, G. (19.i      s   e  58./. org/10.1016/S0889-4906(05)80005-5   
Myers, G. (203). Discore studies of sitific poularizatios: Qstioning he oundarie. isrse Stde, 5(2), 265-279. hps/oi.org/10.177 1461445603005002006.   
Nation, P. (1983). Testing and teaching vocabulary. Guidelines (Vol. 5, pp. 12-25).   
Nation, P. (2006. Hw e abul i nd for reg nd istegd g Rw, 631), 5982. tps:/i.g/10.38/ cmlr.63.1.59   
Nation, P. (2012). The BNc/c0cA word family lists http/yww.victoria.ac.nz/lals/about/stff/paul-nation. (Accessed 1 April 2018).   
Nation, P. (2013). Learning vocabulary in another language $( 2 ^ { n d }$ ed.) (Cambridge). annual meeting of the British association for applied linguistics (pp. 201-218). BAAL & Continuum Press.   
Newton, J. M., & Nation, P. (2020). Teaching ESL/EFL listening and speaking. Routledge.   
urmkamd,   We, . (209). i cvge and profiling.  chig 22) 188-20. htps/i.g/101017/026144819000028   
Parknson q  h    r  . e, 1, 369-387. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0889-4906(99)00012-5   
Parkson    00Te  r    n  sh     37./i. 10.1016/j.esp.2003.11.005   
Parkno  J   0    .r Purposes, 26, 443-461. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2007.01.001   
Pers,  019 Tff  my an n- et onf  vauly n  l t. l el, 53(4, 1008-1032. https://doi.org/10.1002/tesq.531   
Peers  . 2018)  bul sin th whn ige e f 2 i. e i nd qustio, 40, 551-577. https://doi.org/10.1017/S0272263117000407   
Quero 5 th     orit Wellington]. Victoria University of Wellington Archive.   
Reppen, R. (2010). Using corpora in the language classroom. CUP.   
Rodgers, 018). Th m i isiopms dh til r l  h eioh tw mgy an aulay. ITL - International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 69(1), 191-211. https:/doi.org/10.1075/itl.00012.rod   
Rolls     -    s Purposes, 48, 44-56. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.07.002   
Song . y i o the  f  re (6), 131-141. https://doi.org/10.7575/ijalel.v.1n.6p.131   
Stubs,  (198.  y  moqe a om ig.  d d.    . 78ty f nham.   
Swaffar Je  (199.   r vi th f  rhe   , 12, 75-8./. org/10.2307/328785   
kau, 013) a  iis r  . ni, , 150-6/./.74/13/4/ 12/A05/Takaesu   
Tauroza,   Alison .(190. Spech rate i British English. Aplied Linguistcs, 1) 90-105. https/oi.g/10.1093/applin/11.1.90   
Ure, J. (1971). Lexical density and rester iffeentiation. In G. Perren, & J. L M. Trim (E.) Applications of inguistic (p. 443-452). CUP.   
Valipouri  ji,  (013). os- dy f  vay n chy  e. l f is for Ac Pe, 2(4, 248-263. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2013.07.001   
an Dijck, . 6). P sci h ciy  i   o  e, 91), -24./i.g 10.1177/1367877906061162   
Van d  3 i   ic, 34(4), 457-479. https://doi.org/10.1093/applin/ams074   
oi x d   i f vs .   ic y, 16(3), 487-514. https://doi.org/10.1515/cllt-2019-0022   
kvic-tmic  )y iit f r scieeo r sh or c c s- ty. n ic .), ol. Belgade Ensh   e s 0r .43947).hp/./0185/2020.ch26. f h in Belgrade.   
Wang ., Liang , Gang-h . 2008). tismt of a medal wd ist gish for fic Ps 27 442-458. hp/i.rg0.1016/. esp.2008.05.003 doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2013.01.187   
Webb, ., Rdgers M. (2009b). The lexica coverage of movie. Applied Linguistics 30(3), 407-427. htps:/doi.org/10.1093/applin/mp010   
West, M. (1953). A general service list of English words. Longman.   
Wingrove, P. (2017). Hw suble are TED ts for acdmic listeng Jndl of nglish for Adic Pes, 30, 79-5.hp//doi.10.1016/. jeap.2017.10.010   
Ye, Y. (2020P  d ce ad rg s n a x:  hd  hsn,  l10065. h/.g 10.1016/j.amper.2020.100065-   
Ye Y. 201).F a to0 cie i  scic r.  of sh or c   ie 101025. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101025   
kra17  hr . l. .), (pp. 1190-1195). IATED Academy. https://doi.org/10.21125/edulearn.2017.1249.