Book review

Pedagogical Innovations in Oral Academic Communication, Megan M. Siczek (Ed.). University of Michigan Press (2021). p. 256 pp ISBN: 978-0-472-03895-4. \$US29.95, 24.33

It is high time for the edited collction Pedagogical Inovations in Oral Academic Communication. Great importance is placed on developing academic writing skils, asevidenced in the pride that many universties take in their writing centers. However, as noted by most contributors o this volume, the targeted teaching of oral academic communication (OAC) has not received as much focus It i for this reason that this resource has been much anticipated, so much so that one of the reviewers was recently invited to a book lub devoted to its discussion.

While many resources cover academic speaking in terms of presentations and classroom discussons, this volume covers a much broader spectrum of academic interactions, many of them spontaneous, including study groups, office hours, smal talk and networking, as well as more formal exchanges like thesis defense and job interviews. Well-constructed OA support can build a bridge between the classroom, aademia, and the professional world. As Sicek, editor of the collction, stresses, As ToL practitioners, we have a stake in preparing our multilingual students to be ful participants in our academic discourse communities and, more broady, in our complex and interdependent global society" (p. 19). As noted by Freeman, a contributor to the volume, international students need to engage in a range of important academic conversations from the day of their rrival- oral interactions that can be challenging both linguistically and because of the very nature of conversation," which ishighly context-dependent and socio-culturally demanding (p. 106). This volume recognizes these challenges and provides readers with myriad strategies to help students address them.

The book contains four parts, with chapters written by acomplished practitioners The three chapters in Part I and four chapters in Par I fous on teaching OA in undrraduate and gadate context, esectively. Par II iludes thee chapters highlightin crosdisciplinary collaborations, and the two chapters in Part IV describe coursework designed to elevate student voices. Chapters begin with current research or theoretical frameworks that support the pedagogy, describe the OAC coursework developed, and end with outcomes that include suggestions for enhancements to the coursework or adaptation to other settings. Written mainly for an audience of TESOL practitioners in higher educatio setings, much of the materia could also be used with L1 speakers. As Siczek mentions in the introduction, All students, regadessof their cultural and linuistc background, hae to navigat the sometimes fraught trrain of oral communication within a new academic discourse community' (p. 4).

University intructors often work with international students who are in the process f negotiating a new language and/or culture within a new academic discourse community. A theme throughout the book is the importance of string away from a deficit approach to such learners, i.e., not focusing on perceived gaps in multilingual students background and English language skills, but rather celebrating and leveraging their value in terms of different cultural knowledge, languages, and perspectives. Recognizing and cele brating what students bring to the table is front and center in Chapter 7, in which the authors describe how students and instructors (or tutors) can work together to identify immediate communicative challenges, using the students knowledge of their context and discipline together with instructors language expertis. This just i time" processcan be applied to various spech genre, allowing students and intructors to find nuanced ways for students to be more successul in complex interactions with peers faculty, and staff The course described in this chapter is broken up into 5-week modules that build on each other, a strategy that can be useful in balancing students responsibilities in their core courses with their need for language support. Another non-semester long course is described in Chapter 2. In a 2-day workshop in an EFL stting, activities are framed through language socialization theory and employ a design thinking approach, thus preparing students to communicate confidently in a global professonal development program.

Another theme that emerges is the importance of recognizing the various discourse communities in which students interact and being responsive to these settings. For instance, the incorporation of discipline-specific topics and assgnment, as opposed to more generic ones, is encouraged. Chapter 1 focuses on genre-based and multimodal OAC pedagogy, describing a module-based undergraduate course designed to support students as they become a part of their academic discourse community. Activities include a mini ethnographic oservation of a class leading a discussion on a global or intercultural theme, and giving a persuasive presentation on a topic for which they have also created an infographic. Chapter 3 also focuses on participation in a specific discourse community, in this case for international busines students. The authors, whose students rsearch and present a discipline-based problem, use a blended learning approach to improve students' presentation skils, teamwork, and digital literacy, thereby trying to close what employers lament as "a gulf' between the classroom and the professional world (p. 58).

As noted above, this edited volume is consistent i it asset-oriented pedagogy that recognizes the \*the value divers students bring to our leng conies (Sicek, p.8.  is til critical, netheles, tht w met multilinl studs whre thy ar. s such several chapters in the book addres confidence building and reducing anxiety. The focus of Chapter 4, for instance, is how to build confidence, performative habits, and interdisciplinary audience awareness through presentations. The authors cite research that clearly demonstrates how speaking in a language that is not your L1 and in a new, and perhaps very different, academic culture can lead to intense levels of anxiety. The authors then demonstrate how \*continual low-stakes formative asessment, [can make] a given speech act begin to feel commonplace and normalized\* (p. 82), detailing presentation activities that include performing, rewatching, self-analysis and per evaluations. Chapter 6, with an emphasis on teaching academic conversation skill using metacognitive tratey instruction, also suggests strategies for helping students develop the confidence they need to participate in their academic communities, including conversations outside the claroom. As noted by the author, Students who lack the confidence to participate in such conversations miss important opportunities to deepen their academic discourse socialization' (p. 104). The course described is therefore designed to help students manage various layers of conversations, including content, mechanics, hidden influences/cultural assumptions, and self-evaluation, to the best of their abilities while providing them with strategies for continued, autonomous learning. Chapter 8 outlines how to use drama techniques to help students create an English-speaking identity, again with an eye toward building confidence in learners so that they can put themselves "out there" even if using a language that might not feel so comfortable' (p. 142). Using their respective expertise in language learning and theatre, the authors designed a course that helps students create an English-speaker identity using improv, script analysis, rehearsal, performance, and reflection.

Chapter 8 is by no means the only chapter that ilustrates the value of collaborating across isciplines. Chapter 10 outlines a multi. disciplinary approach to a Computer Science research presentation course that includes instruction from experts in engineering communication and in ESL as well as peer coaching. The authors report intial results from an IRB-approved study of the course, indicating that advisor and peer support are key components of students' discourse socialization. Chapter 9 also uses an interdisciplinary approach, outlining a 7-week module in which students complete a sociolinguistic project, choosing a type of interaction relevant to their context and then posing a research question, collecting data, and presenting their methods and findings in the form of a poster presentation.

Language experts working together with content experts is one way of leveraging the strengths" (Siczek, p. 8) of the fields of EAP and ESP, another principle that can be sen throughout this volume's chapters. In Chapter 5, the authors describe how they support the socialization of international Master of Law students. Using needs analysis methodology from the field of EAP and socialization frameworks, they identified frequent law-school related communicative tasks and helped students improve their competencies in such tasks. The tasks, such as practicing OAC for networking and office hours, are applicable to other settings. As the above descriptions illustrte, another common theme is the notion of creating an environment for students to become autonomous in their learning through self-assesment or evaluation, self-reflction, and self-leaning A further example of this theme appears in Chapter 12, hich focuses on expanding students rhetorical flexibility. The authors advocate for and provide students with prompts to promote selfreflection, pushing the students to think about different "Englishes'" and unpack assumptions about language. And Chapter 11, which outlines how the author implemented an English as an International Language curriculum, includes ideas on how to provide students with opportunities to self-assess and re-examine their pronunciation goals.

In short, this collection is a must-read for anyone supporting undergraduate or graduate students in the realm of OAC and beyond. Recommendations for future volumes include more explicit suggestions for improving pronunciation. Apart from Chapter 11 and a few ther excetions, this ittle mention as to how isue f pronciation, which are often on the minds of students, can be speifally addressed in OAC. Numerous chapters mention the opening of university oral communication centers or of writing centers adding speaking support to their offrings. A welcome addition to asecond volume of Pedagogical Innovations in Oral Academic Communication would be a chapter from an author who has experience implementing such a center.