# "Now I hear what you say" - How short EAP courses can foster successful academic interactional strategies

Clare Wrighta,\*, Anna Tsakalakib, Mei Lin c a University of Leeds Department of Linguistics and Phonetics, Michael Sadler Building, Leeds, LS2 9JT, United Kingdom University of Rdng Intitte of Ection, London Rod Campus, Buding 19, 4Rednds Rd, Rding Berkshire, RG1 5E, Unitd Kingdom Newcastle Universit Schol of Ecatio, Communication and Language Siences, King Gerge  Building, Victoria Road, Nwcaste pon yne NE1 7RU, United Kingdom

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic interactional competence   
EAP   
Strategies   
Skills   
Disposition   
Speaker stance

In globalised higher education, strategies to build academic interactional competence can be key to international students' success, e.g. in seminars and oral assessments. Linguistically, academic interaction requires meaning-focused, other-oriented oral skills, which can be challenging for international second-language (L2) students to acquire, even with specific training. This study reports on data from 230 postgraduate students of mixed L1s, comparing use of L2 listening and speaking strategies at the start and end of a 5-week English for Academic Purposes (EAP) programme at a UK university. We found a moderate significant improvement over time in meaningfocused listening strategies, and some evidence in increased use of a wider range of speaking strategies. Further factor analysis revealed a subtle but clear shift towards more other-oriented stance in both listening and speaking strategy use, although with much individual variation, and no significant correlation with proficiency. This study, one of the first to use speaker stance analysis in studying L2 academic communication, shows that even short-term EAP courses can have valuable potential in boosting strategies and skills, particularly in listening, which are needed for successful academic interactional competence.

# 1. Introduction

Researchers and language teachers have long been interested in the challenges in learning to communicate and interact effectively in asecond language (Canale & Swain, 1980; Savignon, 2007; Tavakoli & Wright, 2020). Within EAP programmes, the huge growth in international students atending English-medium higher education courses raises the takes for training students in good academic oral interactional abilies. Such abilitie cn fect both studnts aadmic sces (Andrade, 206; Trenkic & Warington, 2019), as wel as impacting on their successul sociocultural adaptation (Wright & Schartner, 2013). Setting aside for now the issue of evaluating academic performance related to displaying content-specific knowledge, this study examines how to encourage specific listening and speaking strategies to boost ineractional bilities in academic settings, adding the relatively underexplored impact of speaker stance, within the context of a typical short English for Academic Purposes course.

Decades of research into L2 communicative competence highlights the complex mix of factors involved in good interactional abilities (Lennon, 1990; Ortega, 2011; Savignon, 2007). Teachers and learners alike are familiar with the EAP demands of preparing presentations which can be fluently communicated, followed up by more hesitation in the following unprepared question and answer sesion. Tw main as of reerch are releant here. First, from a psychlinusti prspective on spech procesing, it is mportant to undersand how to foster the kind of meaning-focused, dialogic communicative competence that is required for successul spontaneous or creative interaction (Segalowitz, 2010; Wright & Tavakoli, 2016). This would help teachers and learners seeking to build a broader sense of communicative adequacy in the classroom (Revesz, Ekiert & Torgersen, 2016; Tavakoli & Hunter, 2018)

Second, from a pedagogic perspective, the use of strategies - either for language learning or communication - have also been identified as eential in building ineractive efectivenes, in and out of academic settings (Cohen & Macaro, 2007; Kasper & Kel. lerman, 1997; Nakatani, 2006, 2010; Oxford, 1995; Walsh, 2011). Strategic competence, explained in more detail subsequently, refers here to a psycho-social mix of actions and attitudes which language leaners may use to try to improve thir language use. This may include communication strategies to compensate for gaps in linguisic or sociocultural knowledge (Kasper & Kellerman, 1997; Pou. lisse, 1993), or specificefforts to improve different aspects of language learning (Cohen & Macaro, 2007; Oxford, 1990, 1995). Attituinal factors are also presumed to play a role, reflected in leners willingnes to communicate (MacIntyre, Clement, Dornyei, & Noels, 198), and readines or positie disposition' towards the eforts needed to create shared understanding (Hattie & Donoghue, 2016; Litlejohn, 2008). Another factor in strategic competence has recentl ben identified: the degree to which active engagement between peaker and listener - speaker stance' - can limit or aid dialogic interaction (Ge, 2011; Wang, Bristol, Mowen, & Chakraborty, 2000). However, how to transfer good understanding of strategic competence into EAP teaching for interaction has not been fully explored. Therefore, greater understanding of interactional strtegic effctivenessfrom both psycholinguistic and interactional perspectives can be useful for learners and teachers alike to help addres some of the challenges in developing successful communicative abilities in and out of the EAP classroom (Segalowitz, 2010).

Additionally we argue here that some of the barriers to developing effective communicative interactional abilities in L2 contexts such as international EAP settings, may aris from prior educational experience. lassoom learners used to standard language tests may rely on form-focused processing as being most likely to lead to the best score, if what is required is eficient management of learned information required by analytic-type tests (Field, 2008; Wright, 2018). They may also lack instruction in or practice of the kinds of communicative and socio-affective strategies needed for interactie discussion (Tavakoli & Wright, 2020). But for the thousands of international students studying on academic English programmes (EAP) in Anglophone settings such as the UK, it is a great challenge to overcome thee barriers and adjust to the kind of meaning-focused interactive discourse which is expected (Andrade, 2006; Wright & Schartner, 2013). In order to help address this challnge, it is common to follow a short EAP course incorporating speaking and listening practice, to help their communicative abilities in academic interaction (Wen, 2018).

However, the effctiveness of such short course on academic interactional abilities has not been widely studied, to our knowledge. There is thus a gap in understanding whether, and how quickly, EAP courses can impact on developing meaningful interaction abilities for academic purposes, such as in seminars: a gap which has motivated this study. Academic interaction also requires mastery of critical thinking and content knowledge (Lin, Preston, Kharrufa, & Kong, 2016), which we do not specifically addressi this study. Here, we seek to shed light from research from the two strategic competence themes identified previously of processing and stance, to help practitioners understand why some students may struggl, even if well motivated, to make much progress in becoming more communicative in interaction.

# 2. Background literature

A wide range of research has been conducted to understand the development of L2 oral interaction. We focus here on ideas arising from psycho-social research which we believe can usefull inform teaching practice in relation to developing the kind of oral inter. action needed in international study setings. First, cognitive-focused research looks at building greater cognitive and utterance fluency in speech production (Segalowitz, 2010), or developing beter cognitie abilities for listening for meaning and gist (Field 2004; Graham, Santos, & Vanderplank, 2011). This paradigm is sometimes used to make a top-down/bottom-up distinction in operationalising speaking and istening (e.g. Cook, 2008; Field, 2004; Graham et al., 2011; Seedouse, 2013), which can also be een as similar to the meaning-focused versus form-focused dichotomy used in CLT (Whong, 2013). In line with research into communicative abilities in the classroom (e.g. Bachman & Clark, 1987; Chen & Wright, 2017; Walsh, 2011), we see meaning-focused speaking pro cesses as focused on message-oriented top-down interactional speech, versus step-by-tep bottom-up form-focused construction of a transmission-style utterance (Ells, 2001; Seedhouse, 2013). Both types of speech may be fluent, but meaning-foused pech would e seen as aligned to a goal of creating a listener-rlevant interactive utterance, where accuracy may be less of a priority. By contrast form-focused speech may be based on training in monologic speaking as performance, which may beaccurate but potentially based on pre-learned expressions or rehearsed recitation, and without ncessarily taking the hearer into ccount (Wright, 2018, 2020). Current sociocultural interest at pragmatic discourse-level has also yielded interesting and useful insights into L2 interactional research (Seedhouse & Walsh, 2010; Walsh, 2011), including evidence of classroom interaction typically as based on speech as transmission rather than interaction (Seedhouse, 2013).

A second psycho-social paradigm derives from behavioural and attitudinal research on individuals' use of communication strategies (Kasper & Kellerman, 1997; Poulisse 1993) and language and learning strategies (Cohen & Macaro, 2007; Oxford, 1990, 1995) In this paradigm motivational factors are assumed to play a role in individuals' willingnes to communicate (wTC, e.g. Macintyre et al., 1998), and success can depend on developing a positive habit of mind or disposition' towards efective communication (Littlejohn, 2008).

In addition, cultural and educational psychological studies have considered the notion of speaker stance. Research suggests there is a dichotomy between shared versus individual stance in "transactive dialogue (Faulkner, Littlton, & Woodhead, 2013, p. 219) as seen in the notion of self-orientation versus collective-orientation in task-completion (Ge, 2011; Wang et al, 2000). Not much work has yet emerged on speaker stance in applied linguistics or EAP work, but it can be argued that self-orientation may underpin a tendency to act safer speaker f spaking s se as risky, then producig accurate f rather limited speh may be enough  ulfil self-oriented goals of production without checking comprehension. Such speech may be prioritised over the demands of more risky creative interactive communication which arguably requires 'other-orientation (MacIntyre et al., 1998; Segalowitz, 2010; Wright, 2018). All these psycho-social perspectives are useful to understand problems in developing effctive communicative interaction; however, it is unclear how far existing research has been applied to specific EAP contexts, to help support reliable evidence-based practice in academic settings.

Many western educational settings may include assumptions that communicative or interactive learning is required in many disciplines to achieve better academic outcomes, in terms of critcality, or the higher-order conceptual and analytic kill in handing abstract ideas required at academic level (Bloom, 1956; Ellwood & Nakane, 2009). Criticality in interaction is defined here as the ability to verbalise one's thinking, discuss deas with peers and reach conclusions based on the discussion (Lin et al., 2016). In such contexts, communicative interactional abilities and strategies may be required including listening efectively for meaning, checking comprehension of potentilly dificult abstract or technical terminology, articulating complex constructs, being able to check peers understanding and rephrase f required. It can be challenging even for home students to develop critical interaction, and may be even more so when doing this in a second language. For international student, sucessful interactions may be crucial to getting that highly prized international academic qualificatio, and yet littl is known about the processes involved in building up greater levels of ac. ademic interaction. Further work needs to be done on the general questions of building academic criticality and conceptual analysis skills among international students. We argue here, however, that the foundation of academic communicative success starts with improving learners' listening and speaking abilities and boosting their disposition to take part, emphasising top-down meaning-focused processing and other-oriented stance, as highlighted here.

One recent study (Nakatani, 2006) reported on a novel systematic adaptation of Oxford's (1995) Strategic Inventory for Language Learning (SIL) to test communicative strategic competence. The study aimed to test the value of specific listening and speaking strategies for communicative tasks, acknowledged by Oxford not to be specificall tapped by the SILL (Oxford, 195). The study of 62 Japanese female first year universty students corrlated questionnair results with performance on a classroom oral communicative task, finding that higher scores on specific interactional strategies (social-affctive strategies, fluency-oriented strategies and nego. tiation for meaning) correlated with higher marks on the communicative task.

The strategies identified by Nakatani (2006), in our view, provided a foundation for considering such strategies from the perspective of a meaning-form interactional distinction as wellas self or other-oriented speaker tance. Such strategies could therefore be useful when supporting intenational students adapting to the kind of communicative demands of international higher education, e. g. in the high-stakes context of an academic seminar, where the student has to handle the specific skilldemands of listening and speaking while thinking about other people's contributions, using what we term here L2 'academic interactional competence'. This ability entails a shift towards creative competence (Wright, 2020), needing top-down, meaning-focused, other-oriented strategies to handle unprepared dialogic interactions, away from a reliance on 'performative competence' (Wright, 2020), which is more form-focused, self-oriented, often rehearsed interactional speech, based on accurate transmission (Seedhouse, 2013). This kind of speech can be relatively fluent, but usually only if carefully prepared, as is often the case in heavily exam-based educational systems from which many EAP students tend to come (Tavakoli & Wright, 2020). Given the heterogeneity of academic interaction (Seedhouse, 2013), it is seen as difficult to predict the sequences involved in \*collaborative construction of knowledge" (ibid: 212). Building appropriat capacities to manage both top-down, meaning-based processing and appropriate other-oriented stance to enableffective interaction is therefore seen as highly challenging (Tavakoli & Wright, 2020). Finding ways to support EAP students to develop such interactional capacities was the driving force behind this study.

# 3. Study and research questions

In light of the issues reviewed previously, this study aimed to investigate whether and how EAP courses could support leaners in developing more broad meaning-focused, other-oriented istening and speaking strategies. From our review of the literature, we have assumed such strategies serve to underpin sucesful academic interactional competence. Nakatan's (2006) study of interactional strategies in an L2 communicative setting provided a suitable reliable foundation to re-examine these questions in an academic context. Adapting his research for typical EAP pre-sessional course, we constructed a questionnaire to tap strategy development over time across four domains, by comparing across two dichotomised apects: between meaning versus form-focused stategies, and self versus other-oriented speaker stance. The study investigated strategy use across both istening and speaking modes, and whether there were identifiable patterns over potential changes in strategy use. We were keen to see how quickly any changes could be found, e.g. whether a typical four-week course would be enough to see any measurable significant shifts in strategy use.

We were also interested in the related but separate question of whether there was any association between individuals strategy scores and their proficiency, measured in E cores from tests taken before arrival in the UK, or wth scores onuniverst-ased ests of academic listening and speaking taken at the end of the EAP pre-sesional course. However, given our focus on shfts i strategies at this point, and ecological doubts about the impact of such stratees on the kind of asessed tests used in this context, we do not go into details on these data here.

This study's research questions were:

1. What levels of strategy use do EAP learners report comparing listening and speaking strategies?

2. What levels of strategy use do EAP learners report comparing meaning-focused and form-focused processing?   
3. What levels of strategy use do EAP learners report comparing other-oriented and self-oriented stance?   
4. Does reported strategy use change over a 4-week pre-sessional course?

# 4. Methodology

# 4.1. Participants and recruitment

655 students taking a four-week pre-masters' level pre-sessional programme at a UK university were invited to join in the study, and course organisers scheduled time at the end of clas to complete the stratey-use questionnaire twice, irst in week 1 (Time 1) and again in week 4 (Time 2) of the course. Any students who did not wish to join the study could leave class without missing any curricular content. Fullethical procedures were followed, to ensure consent to take part was understood to be on a voluntary basis and to maintain full anonymity. Individual inspection of allscripts allowed us to remove individuals within those classes who did not complete the questionnaire at both times, leaving a final pool of 230 participants from across 12 classes. 204 were from Mainland China or Taiwan, the remainder from Iraq, Middle East or SE Asia. 130 were female, 100 were male; the cohort were spread across a range of disciplines (mainly busines, social cience and humanities). Allof them had arrived in the UK within two weeks of starting this short AP course. In case proficiency played a mediating rol, students EL scores, prior to rrival in the UK, and exit test scores from the university's internationall-standardised English Language Asessment (UELA) were noted. Regression analyses confirmed there were no significant associations between asessment scores and reported strategy use at either point of data collection, so proficiency as a specific factor is not investigated here.

# 4.2. Measures

Strategy use: For measuring strategy use, a questionnaire of 48 items was used, to test 12 types of trategies (variables), with 3-6 items per strategy type. Strategies were adapted from Nakatani's (2006) Oral Communicative Strategy Inventory, adjusted to be appropriate for an academic EAP context rather than an EFL context. The 48 questions were then randomised and produced in two versions, to avoid ordering effects. Piloting revealed no differences between the versions.

The questions corrsponded to a total of six listening and six speaking strategies to allow for between-mode comparisons. The internal consistency of the 32 items addressing speaking strategies is reported by Nakatani (2006) to be high at 0.86 measured by Cronbach's alpha. The same was true for the internal consistency of the items addressing listening strategies with a Cronbach's alpha of .85. To allow for between-processcomparisons, items were coded as meaning-focused and form-focused processing, and also for other-oriented and self-oriented stance. For ease and clarity here, we focus first on the meaning versus form distinction. Two strategies were reframed slightly differently to Nakatani's (2006) design, istening les actively, and thinking in L2, which we interpret here as relating to bottom-up reliance on translation from or into 1. Here, we have renamed the listening factor as Listening More Actively (LMA), and counter-balanced this against Speaking while Thinking in English (STE). This adaptation enabled us to provide a balance between listening and speaking via nglish or not, whilestilllowing for comarabilit with Nakatani's (2006) study. ee Table for a list of the variables and the codes for alysis ee Appendi for the variables and coding of item numbers, and the full questionaire with all 48 items and other versus self-orientation coding).

The items within each variable were pseudo-randomly worded as a positive or negative slf-reporting statement, to avoid priming specific answer patterns (negatively worded expressions are marked with an asterisk in Appendix). Responses were measured on a Likert cale of 1-10 corresponding to how much the participant fel the statement applied to their language strategy behaviour at the time of testing ( $1 = { \mathfrak { n } } 0 t$ at all, $ 1 0 =$ completely). An even-numbered scale was used to avoid answers in the middle of the scale which could be ambiguous between a "don't know" response, or neutral attitude (Dornyei, 2007).

Table 1 List of variables and codes for analysis.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Variable</td><td>Code</td><td>Meaning (M) or Form (F)</td></tr><tr><td>Listening - Fluency-Maintaining</td><td>LFM</td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Listening - Negotiation for Meaning</td><td>LNM</td><td>M</td></tr><tr><td>Listening - Gist-Orientation</td><td>LGO</td><td>M</td></tr><tr><td>Listening - More Active Listening</td><td>LMA</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>Listening - Scan-Orientation</td><td>LSO</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>Listening - Word-Orientation</td><td>LWO</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking - Fluency-Maintaining</td><td>SFM</td><td>M</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking - Negotiation for Meaning</td><td>SNM</td><td>M</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking - Socio-Affective Factors</td><td>SSAf</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Speaking - Accuracy</td><td>SAcc</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking - Message-Alteration</td><td>SMeA</td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td> Speaking - Thinking in English</td><td>STE</td><td>F</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 4.3. Methods of analysis

All dat from the questionnaires at both times of testing, and from participants' entry and exit language scores, were entered into SPSS for analysis. Any negatively-worded items were reverse-scored so all items are analysed out of 10 - as noted previously, scores were taken as indicating how much the participant felt the item applied to their language strategy behaviour $1 = { \mathfrak { n } } 0 t$ at all, ${ \bf 1 0 } =$ completely). Results at both times were found to be normally distributed (Shapiro-Wilks test: $p < . 0 0 1 $ . To address the research questions, data were analysed by mode listening versus speaking), by type (meaning-focused versus form-focused) and by time (Time 1 versus Time 2).

# 5. Results

# 5.1. Strategy use by mode and by time

In order to get a global insight about similarites and differences in strategy use i istening versus speaking (RQ1) over time (RQ4) we calculated the means of all variable scores for each mode of strategy (shown in Table 2).

A factorial repeated-measures AnOVA was performed to test for statisticall significant differences between the mean scores for listening and speaking strategies $( \mathbf { M O D E } =$ listening versus speaking) at entry and exit of the course $( \mathrm { T I M E } = \mathrm { T i m e } 1$ versus Time 2). Bonferroni orrection was applied to acount for Type 1 error, the probabilit of discovering fale-positive result. Listning strategies were found to score overall significantly higher than speaking strategies with a medium effect size $( F = 4 1 . 9 1 $ $p < . 0 0 1$ ${ r = 0 . 3 9 }$ . The use of both sets of strategies increased significantly over time, with a small effect size $( F = 1 1 . 0 4 , p = . 0 0 1 , r = 0 . 2 1 )$ . The interaction of MODE and TIME was not statistically significant $( F = 0 . 0 1$ $p > . 0 5$ $\begin{array} { r } { r = 0 . 0 2 } \end{array}$ , which indicates that progress in listening and speaking strategies over time followed a similar pattern.

# 5.2. Strategy use by type and by time

Mean scores for meaning-focused and form-focused strategies (RQ2 and RQ4) were calculated first for listening (Table 3) and then for speaking mode (Table 4). A factorial repeated-measures ANOVA on listening strategies was performed to test for statistically significant differences between types $\mathrm { T Y P E = }$ meaning-focused versus form-focused) at different times $( \mathrm { T I M E } = \mathrm { T i m e } 1$ versus Time 2). Bonferroni correction was appliedto account for Type Ierrors. The ANOVA showed that form-focused listening strategies were used significantly more than meaning-focused strategies with a medium effect size $( F = 8 1 . 4 3$ A $p < . 0 0 1$ $\pmb { r } = 0 . 5 1$ ). There was no significant difference in the use of strategies between Time 1 and Time 2 $( F = 0 . 0 2$ $p >$ .05, $\pmb { r = 0 . 0 3 }$ ) and the interaction of TYPE and TIME was not statistically significant $( F = 0 . 8 5$ $p > . 0 5$ $r = 0 . 0 6$ ) meaning that progress in both types followed similar patterns over time.

Next, differences in the mean scores of meaning-focused versus form-focused speaking strategies over time (shown in Table 4) were explored with a factorial repeated-measures ANOVA. The ANOVA showed that, overall, form-focused speaking strategies were used significantly more than meaning-focused speaking strategies with a large effect size $( F = 3 9 1 . 4 7$ $p < . 0 0 1$ $r = 0 . 7 9$ ) and that use of both types raised significantly from Time 1 to Time 2, with a small effect size $( F = 1 0 . 0 1 $ $p = . 0 0 2$ $r = 0 . 2 0 \AA$ . However, the interaction of TYPE and TIME was not significant $( F = 0 . 8 2 , p > . 0 5 , r = 0 . 0 5 )$ showing that the students' strategies progressed in a similar manner over time.

Overall, the omnibus ANOVAs, as presented previously, showed that form-focused strategies were consistently used significantly more than meaning-focused strategies for both listening and speaking at both times. Using the original meaning versus form distinction, then, it seems the four-week course did not have a significant impact in fostring a shift towards more communicative strategies.

However, it is possible that omnibus groupwise methods of analysis are unable to capture more nuanced shifts in the use of strategies over time, particularly in relation to the self versus ther stance rientation investigatd in rearch question 3. We therefore used principal component analysis (PCA) to explore patterns in the responses for strategy use at Time 1 and Time 2 (RQ3 and RQ4) Lack of changes could be taken to indicate areluctance to move away from a form-focused transmission mode of speaking (Seedhouse, 2013), or slf-oriented speaker stance (Wang et al., 200). PCA was used for each mode of strategy use to explore whether students shifted their performance from using some strategies more than others over the course of the 4 wees of the course. This method identified main factors explaining cumulative variance in strategy use for listening and speaking at each time (Time 1 and Time 2).The higher scoring factors consisted of groups of strategies that were mostly used at each time. This offered an informative insight into the type of strategies the students were using that complemented the previous analysis with more information on the shift in strategy

Table 2 Mean listening and mean speaking strategy scores at time 11 and time 2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Mode of strategy</td><td colspan="2">T1</td><td colspan="2">T2</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>M</td><td> SD</td><td>M</td><td> SD</td></tr><tr><td>Listening</td><td>6.43</td><td>0.73</td><td>6.54</td><td>0.71</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking</td><td>6.15</td><td>0.58</td><td>6.27</td><td>0.56</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $N = 2 3 0$

Table 3 Mean of meaning-focused and form-focused listening strategy scores at time 1 and time 2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">T1</td><td colspan="2">T2</td></tr><tr><td>Type of strategy</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td>Meaning-focused</td><td>6.19</td><td>0.78</td><td>6.22</td><td>0.78</td></tr><tr><td>Form-focused</td><td>6.61</td><td>0.91</td><td>6.57</td><td>0.73</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $N = 2 3 0$

Table 4 Mean of meaning-focused and form-focused speaking strategy scores at time 1 and time 2.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="2">T1</td><td colspan="2">T2</td></tr><tr><td>Type of strategy</td><td>m</td><td>SD</td><td>M</td><td>SD</td></tr><tr><td> Meaning-focused</td><td>5.63</td><td>0.64</td><td>5.74</td><td>0.60</td></tr><tr><td>Form-focused</td><td>6.55</td><td>0.77</td><td>6.67</td><td>0.77</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: $N = 2 3 0$

preferences over time.

For listening strategies, PCA was conducted on the 23 items at Time 1 with orthogonal rotation (varimax). The Kaiser-Meyer-Olkin measure verified the sampling adequacy for the analysis, $\mathrm { K M O } = 0 . 7 2 $ . Bartlett's test of sphericity $\mathcal { ( Y } ^ { 2 } \ : ( 2 5 3 ) = 9 5 9 . 5 8 $ $p < . 0 0 1 $ indicated that correlations between items were suficiently large for PCA. Eigenvalues were obtained for each component in the data. Seven components had eigenvalues over Kaiser's criterion of 1 and in combination explained $5 4 . 5 \%$ of the variance in strategy use. Appendix shows the factor loadings after rotation. The highest scoring factor mapped closely onto strategies that perceived listening processes as negotiation for meaning. The second factor mapped onto guessing strategies orientated both at the contex of what is being said and picking up familiar words. Factor 3 mapped onto form-focused strategies, such as translation in L1 or focusing on pronunciation. Factor 4 represented other form-focused strategies, such as istening for the first word or part of a sentence, istening for the verb or speaker's message. Factor 5 was about mesage clarity - listening for the main point or indicating if the meaning was not clear, but it also contained giving up istening when they could not understand. Factor 6 represented both listening for the gist of what is being said and picking up familiar words. Factor 7 reresented passive listening strategies, such as listening silently even f they don't understand. Overall students seemed to use some meaning-focused strategies as shown by Factor 1 and 2 explaining a cumulative variance of $1 9 . 2 \%$ of strategy use at Time 1, but they also used a lot of form-focused strategies represented mainly by the remaining four factors ( $3 5 . 3 \%$ of the explained variance).

A PCA using the same principles was performed for Time 2. The KMO measure verified the sampling adequacy for the analysis $( \mathrm { K M O } = 0 . 8 2 )$ . Bartlett's test of sphericity $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 2 5 3 ) = 1 4 0 6 . 7 8 , p < . 0 0 1 )$ , indicated that correlations between items were sufficiently large for PCA. Six factors were identified and in combination explained $5 6 . 5 \%$ of the cumulative variance in strategy use in Time 2. Appendix shows the fctor loadigs after rotation. The highest scoring factor included strategies from allsix categories of our original coding representing a mixture f meaning-foused and form-focuse strategies. What i noticeable, however, is that it contained alot of other-oriented strategies, such as moving away from a preference for use of familiar words by the speaker, listening for what is emphasised by the peaker and for the main point of what is being said. Factor 2 represented mainly meaning-focused strategies aiming to maintain fluency, negotiate for meaning and grasp the gist. There were, however, a couple f form-focuse strategies asociated with scanning for verbs or frst words in a sentence. Factor 3 mapped closely on negotiation for meaning. Factor 4 represented more elforiented strategie, such as pretending to understand even if they have not, and translation in L1. Factor 5 represented form-focused strategies, such as listening for individual words and pronunciation. Factor 6 represented not giving up istening even if they don't understand everything that i being said but stillvaluing listening more than asking questions. Overall, at Time students seem to be using aslightl different repertoire of strategies moving towards more meaning-focused and other-oriented strategies as llustrated by Factors 1-3 explaining $3 5 . 1 \%$ of the variance in strategy use. The remaining $2 1 . 4 \%$ of the explained variance is represented by factors containing more self-oriented, form-focused strategies.

The findings of the two PCAs suggest that, with regard to listening, over the course of four weeks, as a group, participants seemed to perceive istening increasingly as an interaction. They gradually shifted away from the need for accuracy towards aiming for understanding the speaker's mesage. Form-focused istening strategies were used at both times, but there was a shift to more meaning. focused listening strategies, s shown by the increased percentage in cumulative variance explained by this type of strategy use from Time 1 to Time 2. I is worth noticing that at both times there was considerable individual variation in strategy use, as shown by the variance that remains unexplained by high scoring factors.

For speaking strategies, at Time 1, PCA was conducted on the 25 items with orthogonal rotation (varimax). The KMO measure verified the sampling adequacy for the analysis, $\mathrm { K M O } = 0 . 6 9$ . Bartlett's test of sphericity $( \chi ^ { 2 } ( 3 0 0 ) = 1 0 6 9 . 5 9$ $p < . 0 0 1 )$ indicated that correlations between items were suficiently large for PCA. Eigenvalues were obtained fr each component i the data. Six components had eigenvalues over Kaiser's criterion of 1 and in combination explained $4 7 . 2 \%$ of the variance in strategy use. Appendix shows the factor loadings afer rotation. The highest scoring factor related to aiming for accuracy, such as paying attention to pronunciation and speaking clearly. Factor 2 was a combination of selforiented and other-oriented strategies including using a range of vocabulary, simplifying so that others understand them but also staying quiet and giving up speaking if they were not understood. Factor 3 mapped closely on relying on L1. Factor 4 mapped on meaning-orinted, other-oriented strategiesillustrated by maintaining a conversation despite making mistakes. Factors 5 and 6 reflected les flexible, more hesitant speakers, who use familiar vocabulary and do not paraphrase to aid understanding or fit ifferent situations, and do not fel confident about asking the help of others when they are not understood. Therefore, speaking strategies in Time 1 seem to be dominated by form-focused, self-oriented strategies as shown by Factors 1, 3, 5 and 6 which explained $3 0 . 7 \%$ of the cumulative variance in strategy use. The remaining $1 6 . 5 \%$ of variance was explained by Factors 2 and 4, which were a mixture of form-focused and meaning-focused, other-oriented strategies.

A PCA using the same principles was performed for Time 2. The KMO measure verified the sampling adequacy for the analysis $( \mathrm { K M O } = 0 . 8 1 $ ). Bartlett's test of sphericity $( \chi ^ { 2 } \left( 3 0 0 \right) = 1 6 5 1 . 0 9 , p < . 0 0 1 )$ , indicated that correlations between items were sufficiently large for PCA. Six factors were identified and in combination explained $5 4 . 9 \%$ of the cumulative variance in strategy use in Time 2. Appendix shows the factor loadings after rotation. The highest scoring factor, explaining $1 5 . 7 \%$ of variance, represented mainly otheroriented strategies aiming to alter their message for better comprehension. Factor 2, explaining $1 0 . 5 \%$ of variance, consisted of a mixture of other-oriented and self-oriented strategie, as indicated by willingnes to speak and simplif t faclitate understanding but also being silent if they don't understand the topic and giving up if they are not understood. Factors 3-6, explaining $2 9 \%$ of the remaining variance, contained mostly form-focused, self-oriented strategies, such as using only familiar words, thinking in L1 and repeating unil they are understoo, giving up if they were not understood and feeling heitant about speaking. Hence it is evident by the analysis that at Time 2 there is a clearer pattern of using other-oriented strategie (se Factor 1 and 2) aimed at maintaining conversation and convening a message than in Time 1.

Overall, the PCA analysis showed that there was a shift in the patten of strategy use in this goup of students over the course of the 4-week programme, although there was about $5 0 \%$ of variance not explained by the factors emerging from the analysis. The shift was more visible in the use f istening trategies, wheretudents semed to become incrsingly les concrned about the ccrac f ter listening and were more interested in understanding the gist of the message the speaker intended to convey. Use of speaking strategies was also found to change in that other-oriented strategies seemed to gain aclear place in the student's repertoire at Time 2. However, self-oriented (mainly form-focused) strategies were sill being used at Time 2 to a larger extent for speaking than for istening.

In case proficiency impacted on strategy responses, we ran correlational analyses on both Time 1 and Time 2 scores, but there were no significant correlations, indicating proficiency was not a key issue in changes in strategy use.

Overall, in response to our research questions the findings confirm that listening strategies were used more than speaking strategies, particularly to build more meaning-focused listening, even over the limited four weeks of the EAP course. There was no clear indication that meaning-focused speaking strategies were more widely used at the end of the EAP course, using our original meaningform codings. However, using PCA to uncover more subtle pattrns, we found that students used a mixture of form-focused and meaning-focused strategies at both times f testing which indicated a clear shift in the pattrn of strategy use over time from selforiented to other-oriented stance, even over such a short programme.

# 6. Discussion

This study investigated the extent to which international EAP students used istening and speaking strategies, alongside speaker stance, in academic interactions, in light of the longstanding interest in how to build communicative and interactional competence (Canale & Swain, 1980; Savignon, 2007; Walsh, 2011). The study's four research questions addressed use of specific strategies for interactional listening and speaking, using a questionnaire adapted from Nakatani's (2006) inventory of interaction strategies. In view of research indicating that speaker stance (other versus. self-orientation) may be relevant for effective interaction, the data were also analysed using PCA to asses how far meaning-based trategies could be mapped on to other-orientation. The study further examined how quickly any change in strategies could be seen, for example, whether a short intensive EAP course would bring any observable increase in strategy use (compared at the start of the course and the end). Overall the findings provide robust evidence to support the claim that even a short EAP course can make a difference to use of meaning-focused strategies and other-oriented speaker stance, which are argued to boost students' academic interactional competence in broad terms, particularly for listening.

There was significantly higher-rated use of strategies for listening compared to speaking at both times (RQ1), although there were fewer clear differences between meaning-focused and form-focused strategy use (RQ2). Some strategies showed significant change towards more meaning-focused use over the 4-week pre-sessional course (RQ4), but overall students retained a high level of formbased use. This is reassuring in demonstrating that immersion in the target language country can quickly have an impact, even for students from large language cohorts who may still spend a lot of time operating in their L1 (Wright, 2013).

The strategy scores were also analysed using Principal Components Analysis (PCA) to see how far they reflected adjustments in speaker stance (RQ3) from more self-oriented stance (related to form-focused use) to more other-oriented stance (related to meaning. focused use).  pattern of latent factors emerged differentiating between a more elffocused transmssion" approach to interaction (Seedhouse, 2013, p. 212), and a more other-focused positive disposition towards successul comprehension (Faulkner et al., 2013; Hattie & Donoghue, 2016) It remained clear that many students seemed to remain disengaged from proactive communicative strategies, quick oi up f thy ar n undrsood or pferring to sty quie rther than ty and ngag in the ussion. wver, our data emphasise that even in a short time, students can develop a more positive disposition, or readinessto take part, sifting towards strategies to boost meaning-focused interaction and other-oriented speaker stance.

There are potential limitations in a study like this based on student self-reports in that we could not triangulate student responses with actual clasroom behaviour to check for use of strategies in practice. However, the design of the questionnaire specifically worded as ratings of students' actual strategy use, rather than attitudes towards strategy use, amed to minimise the risk of skewed values. We also acknowledge that some classroom teachers may have provided some techniques on how to improve interaction, and thus potentially impacting on some of the students' improvement. However, the findings from such a large longitudinal cohort $\mathbf { n } =$ 230, split across 12 classes), would suggest the shifts reliably reflect deeer development in implicit student dispositio, rather than conscious changes among specific students due to explicit teacher input. Indeed, we suggest here that if these implicit improvements can be sen without any systematic instructional guidance, then using these strategies explicitl as a toolkit to specifically foster strategies tailored to individual students' needs could be even more impactful on their progress. We also believe it is essential to understand whether type of proficiency assessment may impact on beneficial use of strategies, e.g. comparing IELTS exams to university placment or post-course tests, though this study did not evaluat these issues specificall here. Irespective of mesures of 2 proficiency, of course, is a wider question of academic adjustment -if a student is unfamiliar with the demands of academic discourse, in terms of having to processcomplex or new concepts quickl, and constructing an appropriate response, then such demands can be overwhelming or detrimental to their academic success (Coward & Millr, 2010; Trenkic & Warmington, 2019. We therefore need to revisit what students expect themselves in successul interactions, and about the learning journey involved in moving away from a performatie or transmssion sense of feeling obliged to know what to say', with a careful sef-oriented focus on accurat form, towards having a go with a more confident, other-oriented disposition towards willingness to focus on the message, and a deeper level of creative engagement in interaction (Hatti & Donoghue, 2016; Wright & Schartner, 2013). We believe that using a structured strategy approach as identified in the questionnaire presented here can play some part in informing both research and practice for exploring these questions and building more effective academic interactional competence.

# 7. Conclusion

This study investigated the extent to which international EAP students may develop effective strategies for building the kind of creative communicative interaction needed in western academic settings, such as seminars. We argued that tandardised FL strategy questionnaires to check use of interactional strategies such as that developed by Nakatan (2006), could also be aligned with a broader view of meaning-based, other-oriented communicative abilities, which we se as helpful in building effctive academic interaction Using longitudinal quantitative analysis of a cohort of 230 international students on a four-week intensive EAP course in a UK university, we found that slf-reported use of meaning-focused, other-oriented strategies improved, such as checking comprehension, maintaning fluency, focusing on gist thinking in English. This is helpful news for lerners and teachers that it i possible to see shift towards more effective interactional communication over a month.

However, we found wide variation across the cohort and sustained use of form-focused, self-oriented strategies remaining at Time 2. While admitting that four weeks is very short time to adjust strategies to it anew setting, we suggest the patterns shown here may perhaps be embedded in prior language education experience, where knowing what to say accurately may be more highly valued than taking risks in engaging in other-oriented creative discussion, and would remain a barrier to building effective academic interaction (Wright, 2018).

In sum, our findings indicate that a variety of strategies may be useful to overcome barrers to academic interaction, and can provide a framework for EAP teachers to work on with students to help improve communicative interaction in specific ways. Given the short timescale in this study durig which we could se some student strategies changing, we believe there is a high functional value for including explicit teaching of strategies for communication in EAP programmes, e.g, to highlight and practice more risk-taking strategies, and to embed specific tasks to build other-orientation particularly in speaking.

We further argue there i a strong value in future research looking at integrating the notion of other-orientation into interactional strategy use, as we increase our understanding of how to foster sucessul interactions in typical academic settings. Such research would help teachers and students move from reliance on transmission-based L2 performative competence, such as rehearsed pre sentational speech, to creating more effective and successful L2 academic interactional competence.

# Author statement

This statement certifies that al authors have seen and approved the final version of the manuscript being submitted. We warrant that the article i the authors original work, hasn't received prior publication and isn't under consideration for publication elsewhere

# Appendix. Supplementary data

Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2021.101074.

# References

Andade, . (2006. tion ss in ish-kisti: m fr. l of  n io, 2), 131154.   
an      f  01, 20-33.   
Bloom, B. (1956). Taxonomy of educational objectives, handbook I. The Cognitive Domain. New York: McKay.   
Canale, M., & Swain, M (1980). Theretical baes of couniative aproaches to seond langage tachng ad tesig Applied igusics, 1,1-47.   
Chen, Q., & Wright, . 2017). Contxalisation and thnticit in B: Ve from Chine cassooms. Lngge Tching ch 21(4), 517-538.   
Cohen, A., & Macaro, E. (2007). Language leaner strategies: Thirty years of research and practice. Oxford: Oxford University Pres.   
Cowand  r,. 010 the a i tie a ioxr. o J Communication, 4, 1013-1031.   
Dornyei, Z. (2007). Research methods in applied linguistics. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ellis, R. (Ed.). (2001). Form-focused instruction in second language learning. Oxford: Blackwell.   
ae 09 if   it  ii ici r, 32) 203-230.   
Faulkner, D., Littleton, K., & Woodhead, M. (2013). Learning relationships in the classroom. London: Routledge.   
Field, J. (2004). An insight into listeners' problems: Too much bottom-up or too much top-down? System, 32(3), 363-377.   
Field, J. (2008). Revising segmentation hypotheses in first and second language listening. System, 36(1), 35-51.   
Ge, Y.(2011). ch n  io s f ie ss. te rt. te Unrt.MArtation.   
raham  , ., & dan, 2011) pn he toh t istn t nd r us  h c, 154, 435-456.   
Hattie , 6    /.0.2016.13   
Kasper, G., & Kllerman, E. (Eds.). (1997). Communication strategies: Psycholinguistic and sociolinguistic perspectives. London: Longman.   
Lennon, P. (1990). Investigating fluency in EFL: A quantitative approach. Language Learning, 40(3), 387-417.   
LinM   g,016)  r k vis     ive g environments. Thinking Skills and Creativity, 22, 303-322.   
Lite 8 i       881). e Regional Language Centre. The Modern Language Journal, 82(4), 545-562.   
Nakatani, Y. (2006). Developing an oral communication strategy inventory. The Modern Language Journal, 90(2), 151-168.   
n 0 Language Journal, 94(1), 116-136. 167-180). New York: Routledge.   
Oxford, R. (1990). Language learning strategies. New York: Newbury House.   
Oxford, R. (1995. e ays survey. n J.d d.), ng tye i thL/ m (p. 3446). on   Hmson ntl.   
Poulisse, N. (1993). A theoretical account of lexical communication strategies. Studies in Bilingualism, 6, 157-198.   
Revesz, A, Ert,  r,2016). e efc f cplxt a, d fy n tie duac  l s  led Linguistics, 37(6), 828-848.   
Savignon, S. (2007). Beyond communicative language teaching: What's ahead? Journal of Pragmatics, 39, 207-220.   
Sedse .013).  ii  if itio , r .)  ic . 9219. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Seeieh  .i applied linguistics (pp. 127-146). Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Segalowitz, N. (2010). Cognitive bases of second language fluency. London: Routledge.   
Tavakoli,  e, . 2018.  ited in the c un f fcy and elae lso pract. nge Teaching Research, 22(3), 330-349.   
Tavakoli, P., & Wright, C. (2020).scond language spech fluency: From research to practice. Cambridge: Cambridge Universty Press.   
Trenkic,  Wno 019). a an iera kl f he d intty sts: Hw difn ae the, andd it mtter Bilingualism: Language and Cognition, 22(2), 349-365.   
Walsh, S. (2011). Exploring classroom discourse: Language in action. London: Routledge. the country and gender-specific self. Journal of Consumer Psychology, 9, 107-115.   
Wen, Q. (2018). The production-oriented approach to teaching universty students English in China. Language Teaching, 51(4), 526-540.   
Whong, M. (2013). A linguistic perspective on communicative language teaching. Language Learning Journal, 41(1), 115-128.   
Wright, . 013). t w my   l d   g qtio  is. ly, 472, 352-374.   
Wight  018 ff tie nd ask d h g t rig st ad . z, ot s.)  o handbook of study abroad research and practice (pp. 166-180). Abingdon: Routledge.   
Wight . r,  13).   t tt tf . f  22) 113-128.   
Wight k 6 in Language Teaching, 54(2), 73-77.

Anna ki,    thst f   xi d  t and h  e