# Writers' communicative resources for comparing present and past research findings: A pedagogically motivated inquiry into scientists' rhetorical practices

Bingwu Guo a, Jason Miin-Hwa Lim b,c, \*

a Foreign Language College, Qiqihar University, 161606, Qiqihar, Hei Longjiang, China   
b Center for Applied Linguistics Studies, Faculty of Foreign Languages, Jiangsu University of Technology, Changzhou City, China   
Centre for the Promotion of nowledge and Language Leaning, Universiti Malaysia Sabah University of Malaysia Sabah), 88400, Kota Kinabaly,   
Sabah, Malaysia

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Genre analysis   
Results and discussion   
Comparing findings   
Linguistic resources instructional materials

Despite the pivotal role of comparing present and past research findings' (CPPRF) in both softer and harder sciences, scant attention has been directed to how linguistic resources are used in such comparisons in certain applied sciences, particularly Material Science (MS) and Agricultural Science (AS). Based on a genre analysis and interviews with specialist informants, we examined the prevalence of CPPRF, the circumstances involved, and the salient linguistic resources employed by expert writers in the two disciplines. It was found that CPPRF is markedly more prevalent in the 'Results and Discussion' sections of the research articles in AS than those in MS. Agricultural scientists use more author prominent citations, especially after alignment verbs, to accentuate the roles of previous researchers while making new knowledge claims. Experts in both fields, however, employ 'copula-complex preposition' and 'copula-adjective-preposition' structures expressing commonality to explicitly support previous research findings. In cases of divergences, writers draw on comparative adjectives to tacitly avoid direct conflicts with previous researchers' findings in the process of knowledge creation. It is recommended that specific word combinations be highlighted in relation to writers' attempts to generate knowledge via comparisons of present and previous research outcomes, thus implicitly signalling additional contributions of their studies.

# 1. Introduction

Writing research articles in English has become one of the key channels for distributing and advancing knowledge in the era of globalisation and internationalisation. Regardlessof writers inguisic rigins, publishing papers in high-ranking and reputed international journals is regarded as a symbol of achievements in academia. However, scholars and students who use English as asecond or additional language are often faced with a range of difficultis while attempting to get their works published (Hyland, 2018; Li & Flowerdew, 2020). One area of persistent difficulty concerns how to go about making important rhetorical moves in ways that are expected, appropriate, and effective for the disciplinary context. Numerous arguments in EAP have therefore ben presented with the goal of assing novice academics to understand the communicative functions of certain major rhetorical moves (e.g., Liu & Buck ingham, 2018; Moghaddasi & Graves, 2017; Swales, 2004; Tessuto, 2015). Understandably, some introductory moves, such as establishing aterritory (e.g., Baibatyrova & Zharkynbekova, 2021; Khaw & Tan, 2018) and establishing a niche (e.g., Lim, 2012; Moghaddasi & Grave, 2017; Shehzad, 2008), have received more sustained research attention than others. By comparison, rhetorical moves in other RA sections have received lessystematic and focused atention. One such post-introduction move that merits an in-depth investigation i that of comparing present and past research findings' (CPPRF) in the discussion section. Making this move is crucial across disciplines because it works to place the researchers findings in the context of previous related studies in the field, thus showing journal editors and reviewers the emerging value and knowledge contributions of the paper being considered for publication.

Given the significance of CPPRF, we willnow explain what motivated us to focus on the prevalence and linguistic realizations of CPPRF in the two scientific disciplines, namely Material Science (MS) and Agricultural Science (AS). In relation to prevalence, we noticed in an EAP course that many students majoring in MS and AS only summarised their findings in their research reports without linking their findings with those reported in extant literature. This explains why as instructors, we were initiall uncertain as to whether comparisons of present and pastreearch findings are generally rare even in expert writers works in their disciplines. If such comparisons are not prevalent in expert writers works, instructors should have no good reason to demand that their students include CPPRF in their research reports.

While we, as EAP instructors, were considering the aforementioned ssue of prevalence of CPPRF, it became clear that we had to first find out whether CPPRF itelf actually occurs in the expert writers' standalone Discussion' (D) section or merged Results and Discussion' (RD) section, given that comparisons of present and past research findings are likely to be found in one or both of these sections acros different dscipline. This motivated us to first ascertain whether the merged RD sections were more common than the standalone D sections. The attempt t identify the two sections, where PPRF could possblyoccur, was necessary because, as Basturkmen's (2012) work has indicated, CPPRF may occur in the standalone D section, rather than the merged RD section in some disciplines. In fact, other previous studie ., Kanoksilapatham, 2015; Peacock, 2002) have also reported that CPPRF occurs in the D section although the derees of prealence may differ across disciplines. We wil threfore briely reiew these past genre analyses to roughly gauge the prevalence of CPPRF as a commentary move in some sciences, based on the findings reported on D sections in these studies. In particular, previous researchers found that CPPRF is incorporated in most $( 5 3 \% )$ of Dentistry Discussion sections in which researchers provide comments by looking at the reliability of areult, clam or recommendation in the literature in view of the resent result" (Basturkmen, 2012, p. 139). In other harder sciences, some uncertainty has emerged. For example, although CPPRF is incorporated in only a small proportion of the Discussion sections in Physics $( 3 0 \% )$ (Peacock, 2002) and Software Engineering $( 5 . 6 \% )$ (Kanoksilapatham, 2015), it appears in markedly larger proportions of those in other hard sciences, such as Environmental Science $( 5 6 \% )$ and Biology $( 8 8 \% )$ (Peacock, 2002), Civil Engineering $( 6 2 . 5 \% )$ , and Biomedical Engineering $( 7 1 . 4 \% )$ (Kanoksilapatham, 2015). Apart from considering the realece of CPPRF, it i essential to look into how CPRF is relised linguisticaly, especially since we are generall uncertain about how writers use language resources to signal the trengths of their own studies against the backdrop of previously published works. Acquiring some qualitative linguistic data across disciplines would therefore be necessary given that there i no ingle method f equiry, no standard verfication procedure, no defintive st f concets that uniquely characteries each particular discipline" (Becher & Trowler, 2001, p. 65). This means that any existing crossdisciplinary differences can be clearly identified by analysing the qualitative data pertaining to the disciplines. Such qualitative data can enable EAP practitioners to see communities in the overlapping subsidiary domains'" involving the disciplines (Hyland, 2018, p. 28), and help them improve on current pedagogy, not only in the isciplines concened but also in EAP/ESP clases in general, especially since most instructors have students from multiple disciplines in a class.

Before embarking on an in-depth inquiry into the crossdisciplinary diffrences in linguistic realizations, we need to recognise certain fundmental pans of similrities anddfference that cut across iscilinary boundary. In tms f similritie, both MS and AS constitute aplied sciences that tend \*to assert the importance of the research being reported more in terms of the phenomenal world than the epistemic world" (Samraj, 2002, p.5). In this context, studies in both MS and AS are generally motivated by real world problems, and researchers in both of these discipline are expected to see findigs that can reveal how much their reearch bridges the gaps relating t real world concerns, rather than epistemic gaps which have yet to be addressed in prior studies in the research world. In terms of pparent dfferences, owever, MS studies largly focus on mater, material structures, and their various properties and/or applications in knowledge creation, thus yielding rearch results that lead to diverse manufactured products and applications (White. 2012). In contrast, AS studies generally focus on using natural resources of the earth to raise crops and livestock, rather than man. ufactured product orapplications in the processof generating new knowledge (Vyas, 2010) Such differences need to be considered while distinguishing disciplines, given that disciplines are oftentimes perceived as dissimilar from one another because of the "different paraphernalia' that members of the academic community generally deal with (Hyland, 2018, p. 28).

The two disciplines given the focus in this exploratory inquiry are sufficiently diffrent in that Web of Science Group (2021) recognises MS and AS as two distinguishable applied science disciplines. While MS is placed in the category called Physical, Chemical and Earth Sciences", AS is isted as a discipline under a different category called "Agriculture, Biology and Environmental Sciences" Based on the distinct categorisation, we can then examine the extent to which these applied sciences differ in terms of the prevalence and linguistic realizations of CPPRF. Given that both commonalities and diffrences may provide some useful information on instructional planing, our results in this context can provide us with insights into thecircumstances under which writers use linguistic resources to compare preent and past research findings i the creation of new knowledge. Whilelinguistc differences across these two disciplines, if any, can help us make diferent informed choices when guiding novice writers from the two fields indings that reveal cross-disciplinary inguistc similarities may be used in a common set of guidelines for learners in both of the sciences. More precisely, although past studies have focused on the prevalence of CPPRF in research articles (e.g., Basturkmen, 2012; Bret, 1994; Sheldon,

2019), littl attention has been directed to how writers use diffrent linguistc resources to compare their own findings with those reported in previous rearch. Whil it i true that some first language (L1) Eglish writers may encounter les difficulty in discssing results in English, most of the academic writer in applied ciences are second language (L2) English writers, who oten have to grapple with the English needed in research writing as a result of the differences betwen their 1 and L2 writing cultures (Cargill & Burges, 2017; Lim, 2017; Sheldon, 2013). Given that academic writing courses are often expected to be tailored to the needs of second lan. guage novice writers in a specific discipline, it would be interesting to conduct an in-depth inquiry into how expert writers use a range of linguistic resources to create new knowledge via CPPRF, which may constitute an important component i research artices in the two applied sciences.

Studying the linguistc resources employed in cPPRF is important in that we need to (i) minimise unjustifiable asumptions resulting from our overgeneralisations of the expectations and requirements in comparing findings, and (ii) help L2 writers in applied sciences formulate "a credible representation of themselves and thir work,aligning themselves with the socially shaped linguistic identties of their communities yland, 2002, p. 1091). Overall, o avoid overgeneralisations about the prevalence of comparisons of findings and to contribute to current pedagogy on how such comparisons are realised linguisticaly in the academic discourse communities concerned, this inqury (i) examines whether writers in the two disciplines generally present mergedRD sections (rather than separate R and D ections) (ii) investigates the occurrences and degree of prevalence f CPR, (i) ascertains the circumstances under which the move is used, and (iv) explores the linguistic resources used for comparing present and previous research findings in MS and AS in the process of creating knowledge.

In relation to the aforementioned objectives, four related research questions are formulated as follows:

(1) Are merged RD sections more prevalent than standalone R and D sections in MS and AS?   
(2) To what extent do the mean frequency of CPPRF and the proportion of texts containing it in merged RD sections in MS differ from those in AS?   
(3) Under what circumstances do expert writers in these two discipline compare their own research findings with those reported in previous studies?   
(4) How do the expert writers in these applied sciences use linguistic resources to compare their research findings with those reported in literature?

These four research questions were answered using particular research methods as described in the next section.

# 2. Research methods

# 2.1. Phase 1: selection of journals and research articles.

To collect a purposive sample of academic jounals and research artices in the two disciplines, we used two criteria. First, the contents of the papers were examined to ensure that the journals selected were representative of MS and AS respectively, and disci. plinary experts were consulted in the journal selection. Second, we ensured that the journals compiled in each corpus were flagship journals with a prestigious status, as reflected in their impact values in Web of Science. The international refereed journals comprised (iACMatriia Matrl h Bullti atis and ign in MS), and (i)ristems, Prisionre, and cienta Agricola (in AS). The impact values ranged between 2.288 and 3.940 in MS, and between 1.924 and 2.453 in AS, as reported in the Journal Citation Report (Thomson Reuters, 2013), thus indicating the journal' leading positions in the two disciplines.

Our methodological descriptions are described here in accordance with the research questions formulated. To answer the first research question, we obtained data to demonstrate whether RAs containing merged RD sections in empirical AS and MS RAs were more common than those containing standalone R and D sections. This means that we compared the percentages of RAs presented in the I-M-RD-C structure with those exhibiting the I-M-R-D-C structure or other rare structures (e.g., I-M-R-C). For an initial study of the macrostructures in the first sub-stage, a total of 300 RAs (i.e., 50 RAs $^ { \textrm { x 6 } }$ journals) were initially collected from the six journals in the two disciplines. In the second sub-stage, we selected only 60 empirical articles for an in-depth textual analysis. The 60 articles from the two disciplines (10 RAs $\textbf { x 2 }$ disciplines $\textbf { x 3 }$ journals) were selected based on the criterion that each article should contain the most common structure (e., I-M-R-D-C, I-M-RD-C) ascertained in the preliminary macrostructural analysis involving 300articles. This was done based on the rationale that atention should first be consistently devoted to the articles organised in the structure that is most generally adopted by expert writers in the disciplines.

# 2.2. Phase 2: coding and analysis

To answer the second research question, we adopted Swales (1990, 2004) move-step analytical framework as the tol for analysing the rhetorical moves in RDs in MS and AS. The merged RD sections were first analysed manually with reference to (i) the functions of their text segments, and (i) the boundaries of each text segment. This means that the two coders independently divided each merged RD section into different text segments by using annotations that clearly specified the communicative functions concerned before functional labels were assigned to each text segment.

The coding proces required both coders to read the RAs in the two corpora repeatedly in order to (i) understand the general meaning of each RD, and (ii) ascertain the basic communicative functions f the textual segments. The segments (performing the functions of diffrent moves) were first distinguished using previous researchers' works on the Results' and Discussion' sections (Basturkmen, 2012; Brett 1994; Joseph & Lim, 2019; Liu & Lim, 2021; Peacock, 2002; Swales, 1990, 2004). These past studies revealed that the rhetorical moves commonly included by writers were (i) seting a stage for research results, presenting results (statement f findings), explaning results, making a generalisation, comparing previous and present reearch results, evaluating the study, and 'making deductions from the study'. These moves were used to help us distinguish CPPRF from other rhetorical moves in the coding process In particular, setting a stage for research results was only a preparatory move (before presenting findings), which restated the purpose/objective of the study, reiterated the writers research procedures, and/or provided a pointer to indicate the location of their results.

To ensure inter-coder reliability in the coding process, we subsequently ascertained the \*percent agreement" which reflected \*the number of agreements per total number of coding decisions" (Biber et al., 2007, p. 35). The number of coding agreements in this context refers to the total number of coding decisions made by the first coder that were the same as those made by the second coder in each corpus. The percent agreements between the two coders' coding decisions were $8 6 . 7 1 \%$ for MS RDs and $8 7 . 2 0 \%$ for AS RDs, thus indicating satisfactory levels of inter-coder agreements (above $8 5 . 0 0 \%$ . With regard to disagreements, both coders "discussed their segmentation and laeling" so as to iron out the discrepancies arising in the firt round of independent coding decisions explained above (Moreno & Swales, 2018, p. 51). The coders subsequently finalised the labels, resulting in a complete inter-coder agreement in the second round. The functional labels ascribed to specific text sements were discussed, and appropriate labels indicating the specific communicative functions were assined to each rhetorical step. After having a detailed discussion on the final unctional labels or all the text segments, complete agreement between both coders was achieved.

Having coded the text segments, we counted the number of times CPPRF occurred in each text. The frequency of CPPRF was counted based on the criterion that eachoccurrence should minimally comprise a matrix clause (e.g., These peaks coincide with the frequency band of 15R Sic.1) which is not interrupted by another move. In some cases, a CPRF consists of more than one clause (e.g., [This result is in good agreement with the ${ < } 1 0 0 { > }$ fiber texture of directionally solidified bulk alloys], [for which the deviation of ${ < } 1 0 0 { > }$ from the solidification direction was les than 10] and [the grains of which were several millimeters long]). If CPPRF did not appear in any part of a text at all a frequency of zero (0) was recorded. The average/mean frequency was calculated by dividing the total frequency (of al the occurrences of CPRF in each corpus) wit the total number f texts used in the corpus. Subsequently, the degree of prevalence of CPPRF was counted by dividing the number of texts containing CPRF(s) with the total number of texts included in each corpus, multiplied by 100 percent (e.g., $\mathrm { n } / 3 0 \times 1 0 0 \% )$ . Following previous researchers' method of categorisation (e. 8., Halleck & Connor, 2006; Hu & Liu, 2018; Parkinson, 2017), a move was "obligatory (highly prevalent) if i appeared in $8 0 \% \mathrm { - } 1 0 0 \%$ of the texts, and only "optional' (relatively less prevalent) if it occurred in less than $8 0 \%$ of the papers concerned.

# 2.3. Phase 3: interviews with specialist informants

To answer the third research question about the circumstances under which CPPRF is used, we conducted semi-structured in terviews with i (6) specialis informants who were not the writers of the articles incorporated in the sample. To ensure objectivity in the selection of interviewees, we followed Bhatia's (1993, p. 36) guidelines in order to "ensure maximum co-operation from the specialist informant and to exploit his/her expertise adequately". This means that each informant interviewed should be (i) a "practising member of the disciplinary culture in which the genre is routinely used", (i) an experienced member who could provide additional fedback on the analyst's findings, bring validity to his insights, and add "psychological reality to his analysis" (Bhatia 1993, p. 34). To attin these citeria, we ensured that each specialist informant had a doctoral degre in their discipline (MS or AS), and had published papers in high-impact journals indexed in the databases of both Scopus and Web of Science. Using the informants profile indicated in Scopus, we ensured that their areas f specialization were associated with the topics covered by the artices inthis inquiry. The major topic areas included (i) biomedical/drug-related materials, ceramics, electronic/magnetic materials, energy materials, metals and alloys, and polymers/plastics in MS, and (ii) agricultural risk management, cattle production, soil quality and fertilisation, yield/harvesting, farm management, and conservation and regenerative agriculture in AS.

The questions were then \*formulated on the basis of initial analyses of the data representing the genre in question, and to ensure east-biasing in case of the iscussion geting out f control (hatia, 1993, p. 36). To achieve this, we used th findings obained from our initial analysis f the prevalence of CPPRF (in phase 2) to help us formulate questions that should be asked in close relation to the percentages of texts containing CPPRF. The procedure ensured that the questions would be based on the actual figures obtained viathe genre-based textual analysis of the occurrences of the CPPR (i.e. percentages of texts containing CPPRF acertained in phase 2), and not skewed towards our own preconception of it prevalence. The researchers subsequently prepared all the questions that focused on specific points, and the specialist informants were given enough time to give sufficient feedback covering the questions (Myers & Newman, 2007). Questions which required specialised knowledge in English linguistics were avoided, as the questions were too technical to be answered by the informants in MS and AS. Instead, we focused on (i) what expert writers considered to be important While comparing their own findings with those reported in literature, and (ii) some circumstances afecting thir decision to highlight similarities and/or dfference across present and past research findings. The informants' answers were intended to elicit information on the research environment nfluencing their choices while comparing ther results with extant literature in the proces of knowledge creation. The interview questions are shown as follows:.

<html><body><table><tr><td>(2)</td><td>In comparing thir own reach findings with past rearch indings in the RD section, ar reearchers (in your dicipline) more likl to highlight</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>similarities rather than differences between their findings and past research findings? Why?</td></tr><tr><td>(3)</td><td>From your point fvie, under what cistedo you higigt th difee etwe your finngs ad past reh inngs in the D section?</td></tr></table></body></html>

Only three questions were posed to the specialist informants because we intended to (i) focus on the prevalence of CPPRF and the circumstances under which CRF is prevalent or rae (i let the informants have more time o rais issues that the reearchers had not anticipated in the semi-structured interviews (Braun & Clarke, 2013 p. 78), and (ii allow the informants themselves to decide the amount of content to be covered, thus ensuring a "greater depth of response and insight into the reasons for the responses' to the open-ended questions (Gay et al., 2009, p. 178). Each interview was digitall recorded and transcribed, and the transcripts of the informants' responses were then annotated to facilitate the identification of major themes emerging from the analysis. The themes were highlighted using different colours in order o facilitate the subsequent quotation of the informants specific statements that are relevant for answering the third research question. The six pecialist informants included three MS disciplinary experts (i.., MS-DE1, MS-DE2, and MS-DE3), and three AS disciplinary experts (i.e., AS-DE1, AS-DE2, and AS-DE3).

# 2.4. Phase 4: ascertaining salient linguistic resources of CPPRF

To answer the fourth research question, we conducted a qualitative analysis of the salient inguistic resources used by the expert writers. Salient inguisicresources' in this context refers to similar or synonymous linguistic expressions that performed the same communicative functions involved in CPPRF. The qualitative data analysis procedure comprised two steps. First using a word processor, we recorded all text segments performing the functions of comparing present and past research findings' in two main ists representing both disciplines, including those in Ms (eg, The fragments aligned to the roling direction (highlighted with red circles in Fig. 5) sem to confir..) and A(., These reults support findings of Zha et al. (005).). Second, eey main ist was divided into different sub-lits, each of which contained similar and comparable linguisic resources that performed the same communicative function. This means that repeated attempts were made to ensure that each sub-list contained instances with (i) comparable and recurrent phrases (.g., These F values, Both of these values'), and/or (i) similar and recurrent lexico-grammatical structures (e.g, wee observed b Mendes e al. (2012), were found by Postt al.). The linguistic resources were considered as sufficiently alient on the condition that they (i) appeared in two or more of the 30 RDs in each discipline, and (i) performed the same communicative function concerned (Lim, 2019; Liu & Lim, 2023; Lu0 & Lim, 2021, 202). For instance, al text segments that performed the same communicative function(eg., indicating a similarity betwen present and past research findings) were extracted and separated from those performing another communicative function (e.g., indicating a diference between present and past research findings), thus resulting in two sub-lists of language instances that performed different communicative functions. Attention was then directed to the prominent fatures emerging from the sub-lists of instances in the qualitatie analysis. The emerging pattens from each sub-list were then studied by referring to the original RDs from which the instances of CPPRF had been extracted, thus providing a deeper insight into the context in which the CPPRF was crafted in the process of knowledge creation.

# 3. Results and discussion

Our results will be presented in accordance with the order of our research questions (RQs). We wil first indicate the degree to which the merged RD section is more prevalent than the standalone R and D sections in both MS and AS RAs (see RQ1), before reporting the frequencies and prevalence of CPPRF in the more prevalent section in each of the two disciplines see RQ2). We wil then present results derived from the specialist informants about the circumstances under which CPPRF is used (see RQ3) before proceeding :o report our findings on the salient linguistic resources employed (see RQ4)

Table 1 Percentages of macrostructures in MS and AS RAs studied in the first sub-stage.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Journals</td><td rowspan="3">No. of RAs</td><td colspan="6">Macrostructures involving results and/or discussion</td></tr><tr><td colspan="2">I-M-R-D-C (separated R and D)</td><td colspan="2">I-M-RD-C (merged RD)</td><td colspan="2">Others (e.g., I-M-D-C, I-M-D-S-C)</td></tr><tr><td>No.</td><td>%</td><td>No.</td><td>%</td><td>No.</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td>Material Science RAs</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>ACT Materials (2010-2015)</td><td>50</td><td>15</td><td>30.0</td><td>25</td><td>50.0</td><td>10</td><td>20.0</td></tr><tr><td> Material Research Bulletin (2010-2015)</td><td>50</td><td>2</td><td>4.0</td><td>44</td><td>88.0</td><td>4</td><td>8.0</td></tr><tr><td>Materials and Design (2010-2015)</td><td>50</td><td>4</td><td>8.0</td><td>42</td><td>84.0</td><td>4</td><td>8.0</td></tr><tr><td>Subtotal for MS RAS</td><td>150</td><td>21</td><td>14.0</td><td>111</td><td>74.0</td><td>18</td><td>12.0</td></tr><tr><td>Agricultural Science RAs</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Agricultural Systems (2011-2014)</td><td>50</td><td>12</td><td>24.0</td><td>28</td><td>56.0</td><td>10</td><td>20.0</td></tr><tr><td> Precision Agriculture (2010-2014)</td><td>50</td><td>17</td><td>34.0</td><td>27</td><td>54.0</td><td>6</td><td>12.0</td></tr><tr><td> Scientia Agricola (2014-2015)</td><td>50</td><td>6</td><td>12.0</td><td>44</td><td>88.0</td><td>0</td><td>0.0</td></tr><tr><td>Subtotal for AS RAs</td><td>150</td><td> 35</td><td>23.3</td><td>99</td><td>66.0</td><td>16</td><td>10.7</td></tr><tr><td>Total for MS and AS RAs</td><td>300</td><td>56</td><td>18.7</td><td>210</td><td>70.0</td><td>34</td><td>11.3</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.1. Evidence showing the prevalence of the merged RD section

With respect to the first research question, Table 1 shows that only $1 8 . 7 \%$ of the 300 research articles contained a standalone R section followed by a standalone D section, while $7 0 . 0 \%$ of the papers contained a merged RD section (see Table 1). Other macrostructures, including those containing rare headings such as asummary (S) before a conclusion (C) section, constituted only $1 1 . 3 \%$ of the 300 research papers.

Nearly two-thirds $( 6 6 . 0 \% )$ of the AS RAs included a merged RD, while almost three-quarters $( 7 4 . 0 \% )$ of the MS journal papers included a merged RD. Overall, the majority of the RAs published in the six journals in the two disciplines included a merged RD section.  possileexplanation for the tendency to merge setions is that cientists in both of the ciplines gerally place  greater emphasis on linking their newly obtained results closely with their comments in the proces of generating new knowledge. This means that merging results with comments could help readers view new resuls broadly in the light of the writers own contextual explanation and/or interpretation. It is widely known that results are generally presented with a higher degree of certainty, whilecomments usually exhiit a greatr dere f ttivenes (Brett, 1994; Lim, 2010; Wessberg & Buker, 190). I is therefore undertndable that scientists in MS and AS show a greater tendency to immediately support their definite results with some tentative comments in the merged RD section, thus enlightening readers meaningfully with explanatory and/or contextual information. Such commentary statements oftentimes appear via comparisons of newly acquired results with previously reported findings, which are given the focus in the later parts of this paper.

.2. Frequencies and percentage of texts containing CPPRF, similarities and differences between present and past research finding

With regard to the second research question, Table 2 shows that the mean frequency of CPPRF in AS RDs (2.87 per RD) is higher than those in MS RDs (2.77 per RD), thus suggesting that CPPRF is slightly more recurrent in the RD section in AS. In terms of the degrees of prevalence, CPPRF is incorporated in $8 3 . 3 3 \%$ and $9 0 . 0 0 \%$ of the MS RDs and AS RDs respectively, thus showing that it constitutes an obligatory move in both of the applied sciences. The finding suggests that although this rhetorical move is more prevalent in AS RDs compared to MS RDs, both material and agricultural scientists consider it necessary to compare their own findings with those reported in previous research in the process of generating new knowledge.

Given that $1 6 . 7 \%$ and $1 0 . 0 \%$ of the RDs in MS and AS do not include CPPRF, it is essential to briefly examine whether some writers actually prefer to incorporate such comparisons in the subsequent Conclusion section. Our aditional analysis has revealed that all the 30 MS papers have a Conclusion section, whereas 26 of the AS papers have a Conclusion section. Nevertheless only a small poportion (5/30) of the MS Conclusion sections include CPPRF, while only one (1/26) of the AS Conclusion sections incorporate CPPRF. The findings sugest that writers in both disciline are generally expected to compare their own findings with literature in the RD, and not in the Conclusion section. The finding sustantiates our initial decision to focus largely on how expert writers compare their findings in the merged RD section, rather than the final Conclusion section.

Text segments that express similarities across present and past research findings are found in $7 3 . 3 \%$ (22/30) of the MS RDs, and $7 0 . 0 \%$ (21/30) of the AS RDs. In comparison, text segments that express ifferences across present and previous research findings have been identified in only $4 3 . 3 \%$ (13/30) of the MS RDs, and $6 3 . 3 \%$ (19/30) of the AS RDs (see Table 2). The findings suggest that both MS and AS researchers generally place a greater emphasi on similarities rather than diffrences between present and past research findings in their RDs; nonetheless an observable cross-disciplinary divergence does exist when it comes to pointing out differences across present and past research results. This is evident in that most AS RDs highlight dfferences across present and past research findings, while only a minority of the MS RDs incorporate such differences.

Table 2 Mean freucies and pta of xs coCRF, siiie adfee ewe pret and st h findn inM and AS RDs studied in the second sub-stage.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Category</td><td> Sub-category</td><td>MS RDs</td><td>AS RDs</td></tr><tr><td>Comparison of present and past research findings (CPPRF)</td><td>Overall frequency of CPPRF Mean frequency of CPPRF Standard deviation of CPPRF No. of RDs containing CPPRF Percentage of RDs containing CPPRF (%) Status of CPPRF</td><td>83 2.77 2.046 25 83.33 Obligatory</td><td>86 2.87 2.013 27 90.00 Obligatory</td></tr><tr><td>Similarities between present and past research findings</td><td>Overall frequency of text segments containing similarities. Mean frequency of text segments containing similarities Standard deviation of text segments containing similarities Total number of RDs containing similarities (n = 30) Percentage of RDs containing similarities (%)</td><td>58 1.93 1.856 22 73.33</td><td>48 1.60 1.499 21 70.00</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Overall frequency of text segments containing differences Mean frequency of text segments containing differences Standard deviation of text segments containing differences Total number of RDs containing differences (n = 30) Percentage of RDs containing differences (%)</td><td>25 0.83 1.206 13 43.33</td><td>38 1.27 1.388 19 63.33</td></tr></table></body></html>

Examining the data further, we have found that the mean frequencies of similarities across present and past researchfindings in MS RDs (1.93 per section) and AS RDs (1.60 per section) are markedly higher than those of differences between present and past research findings in MS RDs (0.83 per section) and AS RDs (1.27 per section). The findings suggest that expert writers in these scientific discourse communities appear to incorporate similarities (rather than divergences) acros present and previous findings rcurrently in different parts of an RD. Such a propensity is particularly more distinct in MS RDs, as compared to AS RDs.

# 3.3. Circumstances under which CPPRF is incorporated

With regard to the third research question concerning the circumstances under which CRF is used, our specialist informants inputs are iven the main focus. By and large, the MS informants' views show that while divergences across present and past research are occasionall highlighted with reference to the exact values recorded in different studies, attention is primarily directed to consistency between present and previous research findings after alternative methods are considered. Likewise, the AS informants re. ported that expert writers generally prefer to highlight consistency with previous research results in a bid to minimise direct conflicts and demonstrate academic collegiality in the process of knowledge creation. In cases where dferences arise, the reasons involving numerical values are generally given and/or supported with a suggestion for further research. In particular, MS-DE1 pointed out that "seeking a common ground whil reserving differences is the basic principle that MS researchers adhere to while comparing their findings with those reported in past studies. MS-DE2 stressed the need for material scientists to compare findings after mentioning "what kind of equipment they used as part of their data collection procedures. It was pointed out that different sets of equipment and dissimilar methods may also lead to different results, thus explaining why material scientists ofentimes compare findings after considering their methods. MS-DE3, however, did not emphasise the impact of using specific research methods on CPPRF, but instead underscored the importance of comparing the exact values obtained in the current rearch in comparison to those reported in previous research so as to convince reviewers that their newly reported findings ae creditable and noteworthy in their attempt to generate new knowledge.

In Agricultural Science, AS-DE1 stated that \*we compare our findings with the past findings in the Results and Discussion' section under varying circumstances, regardles of "whether they are similar or not to our findings, but if they contradict previous research findings, \*we should give reasons" Quoting an instance, he acknowledged that the differences could be because of climates, given that some researchers may \*study in a tropical area', but \*ther studies are carried out in Canada, (and) in (the) U., so there are many uncontrollable variables such as rain, temperature and so on' which can lead to the difference in the results obtained in AS studies Both As-DE1 and AS-DE2 stressed the need to compare findings in two major dimensions. Firs, agricultural scientis need to compare findings in tms f the accuracy or \*the goodnessofthe reults Citing an example, he reveald that in their rarch, the (previous researchers) got 0.9, but reearcher in the current study \*ot 0.92", thus showing that the current study \*is much better than previous research" in terms of precision. Second, as pointed out by As-DE2, agricultural scientists are concerned about the current research trends. Quoting a specific example, he added that if you are comparing two parameters" which \*may be frtiliser A (compared) with fertiliser B", but \*in your experiment, you found (that) A is beter than B by a certain percentage", it would be necesary to consider how to prove that the current finding is corrct and acceptable in the endeavour to generate new knowledge. This explains why agricultural cientists have to go back to previous research' to look for pertinent literature that indirectly accentuates the positive contributions of their newly inroduced agricultural inputs (eg., frtilier). While A-DE2 highlighted the importance of acuracy and research trends, As-DE3 highlighted the need for agricultural scientists to ascertain whether there are "changes or patterns" that warrant attention as compared to those reported in past research. To As-DE3, agricultural researchers need to compare the different methods" while considering the similarities and/or differences across the present and previous research results. As-DE3 added that even though \*the improvement of technology and the use of a different equipment can give different results" in multiple AS studies, researchers oftntimes highlight similarities beause the same result can also be realise y using different methods" effctively in AS. To sum up, AS researchers may at times highlight divergences across present and previous studies in cases where it is possble to demonstrate a more precise measurement of values, but they normally observe recent trends in technological development and tend to claim the novelty of their newly generated knowledge by referring to an improved method used on a selected rearch site even though their findings outwardly resemble those reported in previous research.

Given that our texual analysis in phase 1 revealed that writer rgely foused n similaritie rther than dferences acros present and past research findings, we proceeded to elicit some statements from our specialist informants to explain the tendency concerned. The relatively lower incidence of straightforward conflicting expresions (that candidly point out contradiction with previous research results), in particula, needs to be examined in relation to the informants statements. MS-DE1 and MS-DE2 were f the view that when previous resarch results reemble the current rearch results, writers understandably \*emphasise the similarities; however, \*when the authors develop new research methods, prepare beter-performing materials, or explain the mechanisms that were not explained by their predecessors", they tend to subtly sigal the strengths of ther own studies by showing the differences between their findings and past research findings through numerical figures. MS-DE3 further underscored the difference between current and previous research findings, acknowledging that an explication is neessay if/when some subtle diference have emerged. Notwithstanding the need to accentuate consistency in situations where different findings are obtained in their current research, MS reearchers opt to use implicit language expressions to cover divergences, thus averting a direct conflict with previous researchers findings in ther attempt to generate new knowledge.

In Agricultural Science, AS-DE1 pointed that when agricultural cientists compare their findings with the past findings in the RD, they are geneally ken to ascertain \*whether they are similar or not', nevertheles, i ther own findings contradict those reported in previous rerch, they fte art it t the limat which differ cros different ggraphicl ions. hile highlighting the need to justify the difference, As-DE1 acknowledged that writers tend to be les traightforward in stating an obvious difference, but would generally provide an account for the difference by subtly referring to some values or variables ssociated with \*the location of the study", or "the scope of the hypotheses' being investigated in different studies. As-DE1 added that even in cases where the new findings obtained aredifferent in some ways, some writers may refer to at least a similarit that can be possibly identified. While AS. DE1 placed a geater emphasis on proecting an overall impression of being consistent, As-DE2 was of the view that when agricultural scientists write a research paper, they are expected to report findings which are worth sharing, and if their result is not suficiently noteworthy, there is no point for them to include it'. He, however, pointed out that if we have found something good, we will compare (it) with others" and \*we can see (whether) this result is also in agrement with other researchers' (findings)". AS-DE2 acknowledged that agricultural scientists tend to "only show the good aspects in research', especially in cases where they \*find that the journals report the similar results which they have just obtained. However, he admitted that ocasionally they \*also report a difference, but in those cases, they need to acknowledge that their research could have been improved if some steps had been taken. Quoting an example, AS-DE2 pointed out that if \*previous research used 100 samples but in their crrent experiment, they "only used fift samples" they are expected to provide reason and suggest how the experiment can be improved i future studies. A-DE3 further pointed out that small changes or insignificant differences, compared to previous research findings, can be mentioned in the RD section; however, when such differences in values are mentioned in a paper published, writers are expected to indicate what can be investigated to advance knowledge via future research.

Table 3 Salient linguistic resources used in CPPRF afer nominalisations denoting results in sentence-initial positions in MS RDs and AS RDS   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Linguistic resources</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Instance</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Using alignment verbs in the simple present after NPs. denoting results</td><td>MS</td><td>These peaks coincide with the frequency band of 15R SiC [18]. (MSRA7: 57) Point B showed Raman positions at 204, 610, 776, 796 and 973 cm&#x27;, which coincide with the Raman position of 4H SiC [18]. (MSRA7: 57) The fragments aligned to the rolling direction (highlighted with red circles in Fig. 5) seem to</td></tr><tr><td>AS</td><td>confirm the thickness of the passivation layer measured in previous research work (&lt;4 nm) [18-23]. (MSRA18: 105) This inference conforms to the statement of Fraisse et al. (2006) that the northern parts of Alabama and Georgia do not have ENsO effects during summer (AgroClimate, 2011). (ASRA3: 50)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>which NAA can be successfully used is somewhat limited as has already been documented (Barranco and Krueger, 1990). (ASRA11: 55) These results support findings of Zhao et al. (2005), Fridgen and Varco (2004) and Buscaglia and Varco (2002). (ASRA30: 68) A similar trend is also observed in the data obtained in the present work, as mentioned earlier. (MSRA17: 189) Similar observations are reported by Liu et al. [21] where increasing the HA content</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>(MSRA22: 2719) et al. [3]. (MSRA2: 1892)</td><td>enhanced the porosity and at the same time increased the microhardness in studied range of HA additions (10-30% w/w). (MSRA20: 449) Similar trends of growth rate have been reported for many other CVD systems [11,14,16]. Similar deformation behaviour was observed in (a2 + c) titanium aluminides by Appel Similar results were obtained by Kim et al. [16]. (MSRA11: 216) Similar results were also obtained for wheat by Farshadfar et al. (2011), with sustainability indices higher than 91 % reported for some genotypes. (ASRA16: 144)</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Using &#x27;copula-complex preposition&#x27; structures MS expressing agreement after NPs denoting findings</td><td></td><td>Similar results were observed by Mendes et al. (2012) and Oliveira el al. (2005). (ASRA17: 149) Similar results were obtained in the study by Anderson et al. (2011) and De Vita et al. (2010). (ASRA20: 415) Similar results were found by Post et al. (2o00) who reported NIR had the strongest relationship with soil brightness, followed by red, green and blue. (ASRA29: 690)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>bulk alloys, for which the deviation of &lt;100&gt; from the solidification direction was less than 10 and the grains of which were several millimeters long [6]. (MsRA9: 100) These results are in line with the findings of Zhou et al. [22], for nano-silica/ polypropylene composites. (MSRA12: 448) This bandgap value is fully in agreement with the experimental one (3.2 eV) [48] and enables use of the resultant TiO2 in photoanode application. (MSRA28: 42)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>These results are in line with other studies (Conceicao et al., 2013) and are due to incorporation of above and below-ground crop residues by tillage operations in CT. (ASRA10: 37) This trend is in agreement with Amans et al. (2011), who concluded, in a study on the nutritional properties of tomato fruits with different mulch materials and environments,</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 3.4. Salient linguistic resources employed in CPPRF

With respect to the fourth research question, Table 3 shows the linguistic resources employed to compare present and past research findings in the process of generating new knowledge. Writers in both disciplines employ noun phrases (NPs) denoting current findings or present studies in grammatical subject positions. e., these peaks, the fragments aligned to the rolling dirction) prior to verb phrases (including phrasal verbs) signalling alignment in the simple present (e.g., corresponds to', coincide with', confirm, con. forms to, support') to demonstrate the consistency of their findings in comparison to those reported in the previous studies, in an attempt to convince disciplinary gatekeepers that their new knowledge claims fall within the limits accepted by scholars in the field. Such verb phrases signalling alignment are ensued by citations f previous research. The difference between the two applied sciences lies in the use of alignment verbs, given that itations occurring inthe grammatical object positions in Ms RDs are generally non. integral, but those in AS RDs are either (i) non-integral citations with previous researchers cited in parentheses, or (i) integral citations with previous researchers' names distinctly specified as part of the sentence structures (eg., the statement of Fraiss et al. (2006), Fridgen and Varco (2004) and Buscaglia and Varco (2002)). The slight difference i citation patterns suggests that AS re searchers,compared to MS researchers, exhibit a greater propensity to rely on \*author prominent" citations (Feak & Swales, 2009, p. 45) that highlight previous researchers roles in cPPRF using alignment verbs, thus demonstrating agricultural scientists' consciousness of the importance to acknowledge other cholars' contributions and demonstrate academic ollegiality in an endeavour to make new knowledge claims.

Expert writers in the two discilines appear to have different preferences so far as the use of passive rporting vers are concened in CPPRF (ee Table3). These passive reporting vers (e.g., has been discussed, have en reported, as observed) are preceded by NPs denoting reearch resuls e.g, similar observations, similar trends of growth rate, similar deformation' behaviour). The head nouns denoting trends and values are generally pre-modified by consistency adjectives depicting commonality between past and present findings in the sentence-initial position. Apart from the aforementioned passive structures highlighting consistency, copulacomplex preposition' structures expressing agreement (e.g., is in good agreement with the ${ < } 1 0 0 { > }$ fiber texture of directionally solidified bulk alloys', are in line with the findings of Zhou et al. [22]) alsoconstitute a salient linguistic resource used by writers in these applied sciences. The complex preposition, consisting of a simple preposition followed by a noun and a subsequent simple preposition (Downing, 2015), is "a sequence that is indivisible both in terms of syntax and in terms of meaning (Quirk et al, 2010, p. 671). It constitutes another prominent (though lengthy and/or complex) feature deployed by writers to distinctly highlight commonalities acrospresent and past research findings, thus demonstrating thir deliberate intention to link their new knowledge claim with existing scholars' works. The use of the pasive reporting verbs and 'copula-complex preposition' structures, in particular, downplays the researchers own deliberate involvement, thus signalling the writers' attempt to direct readers' attention to the knowledge claim itself This is especially notable among material scientis who appear to have a greater preference for \*research prominent citations" (Feak & Swales, 2009, p. 45) with which the significance of the newly reported material properties is given the centre stage in knowledge creation.

Table 4 Using reblance-focused and comparative adjectives in copula-adjetie-prepositin structures to compare present and past earch findings in MS and AS RDs.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Linguistic resource(s)</td><td>Discipline</td><td>Example</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="3">Using resemblance-focused adjectives in CAP structures to. explicitly indicate agreement with previous research results</td><td>MS</td><td>This ratio is similar to that observed for the XRD pattern in the earlier TiAl EBM fabrication by Cormier et al. [17]. (MSRA2: 1891) This was similar to the finding that more metals accumulated in leaf vegetables, namely, Cd and Pb (Ghosh et al., 2012). (ASRA14: 129) The corrosion potential observed in the alloys is similar to that reported by</td></tr><tr><td>AS</td><td>Birbilis et al. [16] for 7050 T651 alloy, whose corrosion potential is also stable at. about 0.750 V [16]. (MSRA15: 121) Furthermore, the tibiofemoral contact zone had a rectangular shape in the present model which is similar to what was reported for HFF [20]. (MSRA16: 169)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>applied a simulation model. (ASRA4: 15) We found significant G  M interactions (p &lt; 0.05), which is consistent with the finding of Tapley et al. (2013). (ASRA20: 416) The NDvI r? values with grain yield are similar to what has been reported in the. literature. (ASRA26: 901) These F values are higher than those prepared by conventional hot-pressing or</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">research findings</td><td></td><td>hot extrusion techniques [25-28]. (MSRA4: 4433) These values are considerably higher than those typically found in commercial purity (CP) Al (20 HV) and in UFG CP Al (40 HV) [28]. (MSRA18: 105) However, both of these values are lower than those reported in literature for</td></tr><tr><td>AS</td><td>hardness and Young&#x27;s modulus [15,16,21,25,28,32] of 8YsZ ceramics. (MSRA17:189) The total Cr levels in edible portions of vegetables were much higher than those found in presumably less contaminated areas, such as Jiangsu, China (0.67 mg kg-1) (Cao et al., 2010) and in Brazil (0.01-0.6 mg kg-1) (Guerra et al., 2012).</td></tr></table></body></html>

Aside from the pasive structures and complex prepositions in cPPRF, alternative salient linguistic resources used by the applied scientists are 'copulaadjective-preposition (CAP)structures signalling commonalit (e.g., was similar to, is consistent with) that perform two different functions (see Table 4). First, NPs denoting findings (e.g., this raio, the corrosion potential oserved in the alloys', 'this finding', 'a rectangular shape in the present model', 'significant $\mathbf { G } \times \mathbf { M }$ interactions $( \mathbf { p } < 0 . 0 5 ) ^ { , }$ ) are followed by CAP structures expressing commonality. However, when differences have been observed, writers steer clear of a direct conflict in thir attempts to make knowledge claims, given that they tend to employ sentence-initial NPs that refer to values obtained in the current study (e.g., these F values, the total Cr levels in edible portions of vegetables', the values determined for total phenols'), ensued by other CAP structures that involve comparative adjectives depicting magnitudes (e.g., are higher than', 'are lower than) see Table 4). While these comparative adjective phrases depict either higher or lower magnitudes, none of them (in both disciplines) involve expresions that explictl indicatedisparity or divergence  is iffern from, differs from, or conradcts). Our finings suggest that in cases whre reults difer acos present and past studies, writers tend to adopt only comparative adjective phrases, rather than outright expressions that conspicuously sigal disagrement or contradictions, ths sinalling their attempts to avoid direct conflicts in the process of generating new knowledge.

Despite the tcit divergence, the aforementioned CAP structures partl resemble the complex prepositions signalling commonality mentioned above in that they are consistently followed by NPs in the form of succinct pronoun-past participle-preposition' (PPP) structures denoting previous research findings (e.., that observed for the xRD patern, those prepared by conventional hot-pressing or hot extrusion techniques [25-28], those observed in other crops, such as sugar cane and peanuts). The findings sugest that even though comparisons need to be made across new and previous research findings in knowledge creation, succinctness i normally prioritized while referring to previous research findings, so that readers' attention can be directed to the prominence of the writers own findings in the overall knowledge claims. Ina nutsel, while the linguistc reources identified via our textual analysis appear to be composed of wide-ranging lexico-grammatical tructures, they are largely consistent with our specialst informants views that the researchers in MS and AS (i) are generally concerned about the need to explicitl establish a common ground shared with previous researchers while making knowledge claims, and (ii) tend to use numerical values to tacitly sigal divergences across present and past investigations to avert direct academic confrontations in new endeavours to generate specialised knowledge.

# 4. Conclusion and implications

Our findings on the prevalence of CPPRF have important implications for research writing in the fields of MS and AS. While the rates of recurrence of CPPRF dffer across MS and AS RDs, writers generally compare their current findings with previous research results in most of the Results and Discussion' sections, wherein comments are immediatel ositioned after their own findings. CPPRF constitutes an obligatory move that writers employ to tacitly promote the value of their work in both disciplines. More precisely, CPPRF ocurs with markedly higher degrees of prevalence in AS RDs as compared to MS RDs. Despite the difference, CPPRF is markedly more prevalent in the RDs in both MS and AS, as compared to those in the Discussion' sections in other Applied Sciences, such as Dentistry (Basturkmen, 2012), Environmental Science (Peacock, 2002), Civil Engineering, and Biomedical Engineering (Kanoksilapatham, 2015). The high degrees of prevalence of CPPRF in MS and AS RDs, however, resemble those in the Discussion sections of Bology RAs, as previously reported by Peacock (2002). A vast majorit of the MS RAs and nearly al of A RAs incorporate such comparisons of findings only in the RD, and not in the subsequent Conclusion section. It therefore appears justifiable for EAP writing instructors to allow and/or encourage novice writer to compare their own findings with previous research results in the merged RD section in MS and AS RAs. As for the circumstances under which CPPRF is needed, this study has shown that writers decision to incorporate CPPRF is often assciated with the extent to which ther own findings support or deviate from past researchers works. This is in line with our informants emphasis on the need for writers toseek a common ground while linking their own research findings with those reported in previous studies. The present and past findings have to be aptly presented after writers have described and explained the methodologies adopted in previous investigations. Future genre analyses may further examine the extent to which methods are reported not only in the Methods section, but also how past research methods are reviewed in the applied scientists introductory sections and subsequently requoted in the merged RD itself before findings are compared.

Analysis of our textual data and specialist informants' inputs suggest that writers, while making rhetorical choices in highlighting similarities or differences across previous and present reearch findings, ofte adhere to some broadly established conventions in the applied sciences. In particular, even though writers in both disciplines place an emphasis on foregrounding commonalit rather than direct conflicts between the present and past research findings, MS researchers appear to accord more weight to commonality as a rhetorical option given that they need to gain disciplinary gatekeepers' approval by reporting new findings which generally do not differ much from the expected physical propertie of the materials eing investigated in the processof knowledge creation. This finding suggests that in making knowledge clams, MS researchers, compared to AS researchers, devote greater attention to the dimensions in hich their own findings could possibly confirm or support previous findings

So far as inguistic resources are concerned, it is recommended that EAP instructors come up with some pre-writing and post writing "pedagogical interventions" (Li & Flowerdew, 2020, p. 30) aimed at directing novice L2 writers attention to the salient linguistic resources for constructing sentences signalling agrement using the lexico-grammatical structures in these disciplines. While novice writers may find the exemplification provided in Tables 3 and 4 sufficiently elightening in terms of the possble inguistic resources needed for comparing present and past research results, i is far more important for EAP instructors to highlight how these linguistic resources are employed to attain the communicative purposes in knowledge creation. In particular, as recurrent word combinations need to be highlighted in second and foreign language instruction (Paquot, 2017), more emphasis has to be placed on how writers generate new knowledge via the linguistic resources reported in this paper. The use of such CPPRF-related resources encompasses how writers deploy alignment verbs, 'copula-complex preposition' structures expressing agreement, and passive verb-preposition' structures denoting consistency between present and past research findings.

It i necesary for instructors to asst leaners in distinguishing the communicative functions of research-prominent citations from those of author-prominent citations, apart from demonstrating how expert writers draw on passive forms and prepositional structures to downplay their own deliberate involvement in knowledge creation. Novice writers may also be enlightened on how linguistic re. sources are used to implicitly signal thesignificance of their findings compared to previous studie. In particular, while learners in the field of AS can familiarise themselves with the use of author-prominent citations in sentence-final positions, novice writers in the field of MS may focus on constructing knowledge claims in the RD section using research-prominent citations, wherein previous researchers names are indicated in parenthese. Given that our textual data and specialist informants input have shown that the applied scientists generally prefer a relatively tacit way of indicating discrepancies, instructors may consider introducing comparative CAP structures expressig magnitudes as a subtle strategy to avert an outright conflict with previous researchers' findings in cases where robust evidence is non-existent. Overal, it is suggested that authentic published instances be used to raise novice writers' con. sciousness of the recurring word combinations in CPPRF. Attention can be devoted to how experienced writers strategically employ prominent lingustic resources to handle commonalities and divergences across present and previous research findings in the proess of making new knowledge claims.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Bingwu Guo: Writing-original draft Validation, Resources, Project adminstration, Investigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization. Jason Min-Hwa Lim: Writing - review & editing, Writing  original draft Visualization, Validation, Supervision, Project administration, Methodology, Investigation, Funding acquisition, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

# Acknowledgement

Many thanks to the University of Malaysia Sabah for providing a research grant (SDk0248-2020) that has helped us obtain related references for this investigation into the comparison of present and past research findings. We are indebted to our six specialist in. formants who have given us useful inputs. Let us thank the Associate Editor and our reviewers for their insightful comments and suggestions. We are indebted to the University of Qiqihar for the resources needed to complete this study.

# References

Aplicadas, 16, 25-35. https://doi.org/10.4995/rlyla.2020.14445   
ask       r Purposes, 11(2), 134-144. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2011.10.004   
Bher  1 i     t.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professonal settings. London: Longman Group UK Limited.   
Biber, D., Conor, D., & Upton, T. A. (2007). Discorse on the move: Uig copus analysis todescribe discourse strctre. Amsterdm: Jon Benjamins.   
Braun, V., & Clarke, V. (2013). Successful qualitative research: A practical guide for beginners. London: Sage.   
Cag . of Adelaide Press. Retrieved from https://www.cambridge.org/core/books/publishing-research-in-english-as-an-additional-language/ D5AC383AE6BE6B3517A4CFBB179A7535.   
Downing, A. (2015). English grammar: A university course (3rd ed.). New York: Routledge.   
Feak, C. B., & Swales, J. M. (2009). Teling a research story: Writig a literature review. Ann Arbor, MI: Universty of Michigan Pres.   
Gay, L R, Mill, G.  Airsia, P. (2009). tionl ech: Cmetnie for anis d plication th d.). Londn: Pon cation.   
Haleck, r  al o    .   sh i , 5,0. /./01016 j.jeap.2005.08.001   
Hu .  8             e, 35, 16-30. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.06.004   
Hyland, (200.      .  f  n 2 1729. /..1016/103743(02) 00124-8   
Hyland, K. (2018). The essential Hyland: Studies in applied linguistics. London: Bloomsbury Academic.   
Joph,   019i o    ti  ti  er  icti n forestry. ESP Today, 7(2), 124-147. https://doi.org/10.18485/esptoday.2019.7.2.1   
Kank5tn  i h tr -ie ra English for Specific Purposes, 37, 74-86. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.008   
Khaw   . . 018.ising rir th tiof rin  i g o-i  ch EE Transactions on Professional Communications, 61(2), 133-150. https:/doi.org/10.1109/TPC.2017.2779661   
Li, e    i ri Purposes, 59, 29-41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2020.03.002   
Li J010in   s  tie   f  o Purposes, 9, 280-294. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2010.10.001   
Li ..     c h. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 11(3), 229-245. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2012.05.002   
Lm J1nif   io  thsh o  . for Specific Purposes, 47, 61-80. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.05.001   
Lim J 019.xpici d ici uiicati f exril pre  aaion: l picatin f g xrt witers communicative resources. Jounal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 34-51. https://doi.org/10.1016/j jeap.2018.10.006   
Li8 chtt  sti a    i for Academic Purposes, 34, 97-109. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.04.002   
L . 2    ths r ue. 3L: Language, Linguistics, Literature, 27(3), 22-37. https://doi.org/10.17576/3L-2021-2703-02   
Li M.  3    r  tsi d Applied Language Studies, 41(4), 433-447. https://doi.org/10.2989/16073614.2022.2136224   
Lu,   1 q Studies, 39(3), 306-318. https://doi.org/10.2989/16073614.2021.1942099   
Luo,    2.   o t  ive   4 75-100. https://doi.org/10.17398/2340-2784.44.75   
oghad,  .7). s    cr     til introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 45, 69-85. https:/doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2016.09.003   
Moreno, I & wal, . 018).gthg o ais m ad bring the fuctioo p. is for fic e, 50, 4063. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2017.11.006   
Myers, M. D., & Newman, M. (2007). The qualitative interview in IS research: Examining the craft Iformation and Organizatio, 17, 2-26.   
Paquot  17 33(1), 13-32. https://doi.org/10.1177/026765831562026   
Paknson, . 017)    t    y. or i , 45,113. //1016/..016.8.00   
Pecock, 00.ti  t i  t ) 9497.016/0346007   
Quirk, R., Grebaum, ., Lech, G., & Svarvik, J. (2010). A comprehensive grammar of th Englis language. Chennai: Pearson India Education. 00023-5   
Shehzad, w. (2o08). Move two: Establishing a niche. Iberica, 15, 25-50. University of New South Wales. PhD thesis submitted to the..   
Shen, 09 ti i of rh i w  2 aia  wr. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 37, 1-10. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jeap.2018.11.002   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Teto d ns-   ni ns over. English for Specific Purposes, 37(1), 13-26. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.06.002   
Thomson Reuters. (2013). Journal citation reports (Science Edition). Philadelphia: Thomas Reuters.   
Vyas, A. K. (2010). Introduction to agriculture (5th ed.). New Delhi: Jani Brothers.   
Web of Science Group. (2021). Categories and collections: Current contents. https://mjl.clarivate.com/help-center.   
Weissberg, R., & Buker, S. (1990). Writing up research. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall.   
White, M. A. (2012). Physical properties of materials (2nd ed.). New York: CRC Press.