# Differences between novice and experienced academics in their engagement with audience members in conference Q&A sessions

Xiaoyu Xu

Department of English, City University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong, China

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Keywords:   
Academic speaking   
Conference discourse   
Novice academics   
EAP   
Engagement   
Q&A sessions

Conference Q&A sessions can be challenging encounters for academics, as unpredictable comments or questions can disarm presenters, particularly inexperienced ones. Novice researchers experience further difficulty in socialising into Q&A discourse due to the limited accessibility of conferences, the scarce attention from researchers on their particular needs, and a shortage of pedagogical materials. This study attempts to bridge the gap by investigating the rhetorical differences in Q&A responses given by novice academics and professors, focusing on lexicogrammatical features. It conducted a data-driven analysis of frequent n-grams and their functions as a precursor to an in-depth manual discourse analysis of the co-articulation of engagement markers. It found that the novice academics preferred contraction markers to express defensive positions while the experienced academics preferred expansion markers to construct a welcoming voice. The findings imply that EAP teaching should emphasise the co-constructive and solidarityoriented tendencies of Q&A after introducing the generic features of Q&A.

# 1. Introduction

A conference question and answer (Q&A) sesson is one of the key events of an academic conference. In such sessions, the presented research is truly tested through confrontation, discusion, and ratification of meaning between the presenter and discussants (Raisanen, 1999, p. 69). Applied linguists have termed such events discussion sessions' to capture the dynamic interactions beyond just a question and an answer (Xu, 202; Querol-Julian, 2011; Ventola, 2002; Webber, 2002). For example, in addition to the rhetorical action of making questions, discussants must ften justif their question and/or comment by sharing peronal opinions or experiences, or by citing others opinions or experiences (Xu, 202). On top of answering questions, the presenters must usuall make situationally appropriate arguments to negotiate knowledge claims, persuade the audience and manage interpersonal relationships (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005; halom, 2002). Discussion session (hereafter DS) works better as aterm to cover thse additional discursive elements, and will be the one used in this article.

The unpredictable, interactive and interpersonal nature of DS exchanges can make these sessions the most stressful part of the conference experience for novice presenters. A survey by Guest (2013) found that 40 out of 52 novice academics claimed that the DS caused them anxiety. Two obstacles can hinder the further development of necessary DS skills among novice researchers. irst, unlike reerch artice, thei ncd re (wae, 196 tht is n usull ublicly asile adis thre unia o novice presenters. Conference ommittes accept academics on the ais of written content alone and provide no formal criteria to guide them through the genre and the appropriate rhetorical strategies (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005). Second, researchers in the field of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) have investigated the generic features of DS discourse and coping strategies (Xu, 2022; Heino et al., 2002; Konzett, 2012; Querol-Julian & Fortanet-Gomez, 2019; Webber, 2002; Wulff et al., 2009 to asst novice academics; however, no study has cosely analysed novice academics' specific nees during aDs. Therefore, it remains unclear what skill should be the focus of EAP training programmes.

This study attempts to bridge the gap in the literature on skill training for novice academics during DSs It will identify the rhetorical repertoire they need to succesfully manage computer science conference discussion sessions. Data-driven and manual discourse analysis wil be adopted. The identified repertoire can be integrated into instructional materials for PhD students to help them understand the DS context and develop the skillst clearly articulate their arguments, manage interpersonal relationships and build confidence in front of an audience.

# 2. Literature review

The literature review section sets offrom the studies of conference presentations in comparison with written research genres for they have established conference spoken discourse as distinctively different from written research discourse and grounded the studies of DS. This section subsequently reviews studies that focus on DS to further justify the research gap (i.e., scarce attention given to novice academics' specific needs) and elicit the research question. The review of DS studies also lays the ground for the comparisons between the generic features found in the literature and the specific needs found in this study in the discussion section.

# 2.1. Rhetorical features in conference presentations

Ventola (199) observed that academic conferences consist of a genre chain that starts with the cal for abstracts and ends with oral presentations during the conference or with the publication of proceedings. The spoken geres can include the oral presentations, the DSs and the poster sessions. However, most EAP studies on rhetorical features have focused on written academic geres, such as essays, research articles and theses (Hyland, 2005; Nesi & Gardner, 2012; Thompson, 2012), and spoken academic genres have received relatively less attention (Mauranen, 2001).

A few EAP studies of conference presentations have made comparisons with research articles and found a clear distinction regarding the mode of the interpersonal relationship between the writer/speaker and the audience. Conference presentations are overtly co-constructed betwen the audience and the presenter (Morita 2000; Rendle-Short, 2006) rather than covertly co-constructed between the audience and the putative reader (Martin & White, 2005). The presenter must not only persuade the audience of the staus, relevance and value f the research ut must confront the audience in person and validate himself/herself (onzet, 2012). This interpersonal context also applies to other conference spoken events such as the DSs and the poster sessions, meaning that these events require a different set f manners for dilogic practices, ornisational pattens and linguistic repertore. For example, Marann t al. (2010) found that the dialogic features increase and that the presenters prioritise interaction and involvement with the audience over the minutiae f research methods and results (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005). These dialogic features include narratives or storytelling, informal and direct markers (e.g, okay, oops, active voice you that refer specifically to the audience or apeal to the hearer's experience of life in general, non-exclusive we, colloquialisms and idiomatic expressions), the present tense to introduce the success of the research, and the past tense to decribe falures (Thompon, 2002; Webber, 2005). Moreover, the blending of textual content, visual content and paralinguistic cues is common during conference events but rare in written research (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005; Ventola, 2002).

Some studies have found that conference presentations are also tempered by discipline-related factors considered appropriate by specific academic discourse communities (Thompson, 2002). For example, humanities and social sciences tend to be more dialogic than hard sciences through the extensive use of dialogic phrases (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005; Querol-Julian, 2011). This factor should also be accounted for in this study of DSs.

# 2.2. The differences between presentations and DSs

Although conference presentations and DSs share many commonalities, many EAP researchers have regarded the DS as one genre rather than as the second part of the conference presentation genre (Raisanen, 199; Querol-Julian, 2011; Xu, 2022). In the DS, the purpose of the session switches from introducing the research to opening the research for discussion. As aresult, the discourse changes from a prepared monologic speech to interactive and spontaneous dialogues. The roles played by the presenters and the audience members become dynamic: a speaker can be the presenter or an audience member; the audience members can briefly present their ideas and reseach relevant to the topic, and, in this case, the preenter can be an audience member who listens to the speaker. These differences led to a number of distinctive rhetorical features in the DS gere in tems of its lexicorammar, structure and kinesics and paralanguage. Each aspect will be discussed in the following section.

# 2.3. Rhetorical features in DS

# 2.3.1. Lexico-grammatical features

Many studies have manually analysed the lexico-grammar of DS discourse, focusing on interpersonal functions realised by engagement and evaluation marks, applying diffrent frameworks. By specificall applying the engagement framework developed by Martin and White (2005), Querol-Julian (2011) found that both presenters and discussants in the soft and hard sciences expand dialogic space for other possible poitions e., I was told, he says, I mean, might be) rather than conract the space (e.g., but, no, neer, though, of course, must, should, in fact). This finding confirms the common practice of mitigating voice in propositions and reducing authorial responsibility in a DS. In Querol-Julian's (2011) comparison of lingustics and chemistry DSs, however, the linguistic DSs presented a much higher percentage of dialogic expansion markers, which aligns with the general strategies for coping with criticism in soft sciences (Mauranen, 2004). A few features found in other studies are also relevant to the expansion of dilogic space. For example, drawing on Hyland's (2005) metadiscourse framework, hedges (e.g.,I think, you know, kind of, sort of) are found to play an important role in a Ds (Wulff et al., 2009) to soften the force of criticism (Mauranen, 2004) and disassociate the speaker from a strong commitment (Skelton, 2007). Webber (2002) noted several examples of admission (e.g., I don't know), whereby the presenter was honest with the audience about the depth of their knowledge and/or the parameters of their rearch and opened up the space for any input from the audience. Among all of the admission markers, I don't know' constituted $1 8 \%$ of the total responses. Others found features relevant to the contraction of dialogic space. Brown and Levinson (1987) and Webber (2002) noted that sometimes the presenter gave an evasive response e.g., what do you think or an outright reection of the line of inquiry e. t was not one of the aims of the study, we did not test brain cells) to close down the dialogic space for disagreement or discussion.

Moreover, some researchers have investgated positive and negative evaluation markers. For example, Wulff et al. (2009) found that positive evaluations are often embedded in the phrase 'that's very $\mathbf { X } ^ { \prime }$ , whereas negative evaluations are often projected by the phrase it seems to me that'. Querol-Julian (2011) applied the attitude framework from Martin and White (2005) and found that participants often expressd appreciation (i., ealuation of things or phenmena) rather than affect (i, ealuation of feeings) or judgement (i.e luationf the action f peple). This inding is simar t wtten rearch geres, where choosing appreciation over affect marker can enable researchers to avoid sounding subjective (Xu & Nesi, 2019). The positive or negative appreciations found by Querol-Julian (2011) were generally expressed to show alignment or disalignment with the other interocutor (e.g., very good book, wasting time, it's ineresting good question). In acomparison of evaluative discourse markers between DSs and written reearch, ebber (2002) noted that DSs are more reflective of casual conversation (e.g., I just can't understand why ..).

# 2.3.2. Other features

Several studies have investigated the rhetoricalstructure of a DS that help contextualise the lexico-grammatical features. Because of the strict speaking time allocated to each participant, DSs were found more organised than dailyconversations with usually one adjacency pair (i., an intervention from the discussant followed by a response from the discussant) (Xu, 2022; Querol-Julian, 2011). Discussants generall make five types of interventions during a discussion session: fact-seeking questions, opinion-seeking questions, justification-seeking questions (criticism), suggestions and arguments; the question types can affect the choices of strategies in the presenter's response (Xu, 2022). On the other hand, Querol-Julian (2011) found a few common moves in the presenters' responses. They often made straightforward responses or a roundabout response followed by an expansion of the topic or rationalisation of position. Although some discussions are unresolvable, Webber (2002) suggested that unlike legal or political debates, which are inherently competitive, academic DSs generally involve more linguistic realisations of politeness and solidarity. They are jointly constructed ventures between the presenter and the discussants.

Kinesic and paralinguistic resources can also support negotiations in a DS. However, they are found to be mostly co-expressed with the semantic evaluation and generaly followed the linguistic tendency (Querol-Julian, 2011; Querol-Julian & Fortanet-Gomez, 2012) For example, the gesture of rotating the hand is used to couple the dialogic expansion marker sort of. For this reason and due to space constraints, kinesic, paralinguistic and structural resources will only play a supporting role in the analysis of lexico-grammatical features. This point will be elaborated on in the methodology section.

# 2.4. Research question and objectives

The lexico-grammatical, structural and non-verbal rhetorical features discovered in the previous studies offer significant insight into the generic rhetorical features of a DS. They outlined the general features of a DS and, by extension, how noviceacademics can prepare themselves as presenters. The findings, however, did not address the specific needs of novice academics.

This study attempts to identify the rhetorical ifferences in DS responses given by novice academic and professors with a focus on lexico-grammatical features. Therefore, one research question wil be addressed in this study: what are the diffrences in the use of lexico-grammatical resources between novice academics and experienced academics? The lexico-grammatical resources will be analysed through two research objectives - analyse the functions of the most frequent n-grams and analyse the use of engagement markers - which will be elaborated in section 3.3.

# 3. Methodology

# 3.1. Data collection

This study has chosen the field of computer science because of the influence of the discipline among the sciences. Common ap. proaches in computer science, such as machine learning, have been adopted across disciplinary areas, including the arts and humanities. The present research uses the open acces educational video reository, Videecture.NT, for data collection. The wesite offers videos of lectures, conference, summer schools, workshops and promotional science events. This study focuses on five A-rank international computer science conferences, as defined by a prestigious association, Computing Research and Education Association of Australia (see Table 1).

In this study, novice academics are defined as young PhD students, who have limited experience in the academic community. In particular, they should have progressed from bachelor's, master's, to doctorate with les than two gap years in each interval. This is to lower the chance of selecting PhD students who may have worked with corporate research laboratories and may be familiar with research presentations. Experienced academics are defined as asstant, associate and fullprofessors (or equivalent) to increase the chance of electing academics who are experienced in academic conferences and familiarity with community norms. To identify videos with young computer science PhD students, the author searched for young-looking faces among the creenshots of presenters faces in the conference search results. Once the author identified a potential presenter, she searched his/her name and the conference year on Google toconfirm his/her academic background. If the presenter was a PhD student during the year of the conference and had les than two gap years in each interval of their academic progression, the author would select the video. Only one video of each speaker identified was selected. Next, each video of PhD student was paired with a diffrent video of an experienced academic the background is confirmed using the same approach aplied to the PhD students using Google search). The professor subcorpus and the PhD student subcorpus should have the same proportion of language backgrounds (i.e.,. $8 0 \%$ non-native speaker and $2 0 \%$ native speaker for each subcorpus). If the online search was not considered sufficient, emails were sent to the presenters for confirmation. The video should also come from the same conference in the same year. The control of variables such as the native language of the speakers or the size, topic, year or house style of conferences in the pairing of videos was meant to avoid bias in the results.

The author collected 50 presentations for the PhD subcorpus and 50 for the professor subcorpus. Allthe DSs collected in this stud are from 2014 to 2018, with each DS lasting 5 min on average. The details of the sample are given in Table 1.

# 3.2. Transcription

After downloading the videos, three research asstants transcribed (verbatim) the DSs in adherence with the TEI-compliant structural mark-up standards that were applied in the transcription work of The British National Corpus (2007) and the British Ac. ademic Spoken English corpus (Nesi & Thompson, 2006). These standards include transcriptions of kinesics and paralanguage as context. As found in the literature, such features often followed the linguistic tendency, meaning that the non-verbal transcriptions as contextual information can facilitate the interpretation of the linguistic features in this study. For example, the laughter from the presenter and the audience can imply a humorous effect of something the presenter has said. The author crosschecked a subset $( 1 0 \% )$ of the transcribed DSs to ensure accuracy.

# 3.3. Data analysis

The previous manual discourse analyses of lexico-grammatical features reviewed in section 2.3 have provided rich insight into this genre. However, instead of relying full on the subjective judgement of the author to determine the rhetorical features for analysis or relevant analytical framework, this study applies data-driven analysis as a first step to objectively guide the subsequent manual discourse analysis Specificall, the automated nature of a data-driven analysis can reveal language pattrns that might otherwise be difficult to identify through manual analysis (Alsop et al., 2020). It is, in fact, difficult for the author to expect what major lexico-grammaticaldifferences there might be. As many frameworks are available for lexico-grammatical analyses with different foci (e.g, engagement, evaluatio, metadcourse, processes), arandom section may not identify the prior fetures, and an application of all exiting frameworks is not feasible. Data-driven analysis is favourable in this regard by automaticlly generating frequent lexico-grammatical forms and presenting formal differences across the two subcorpora. Based on the functions of these formal dif ferences, a suitable framework for a systematic manual analysis can be selected. Therefore, there are two research objectives for the analysis in this study: 1) conduct a data-driven analysis to generate lists of frequent n-grams (i.e., a unit of n words that occur in sequence) of each subcorpus and identify the functional dfferences between the two subcorpora and 2) based on the major functional differences, selet  suitable framework (i.., engagement framework) to systematically validate the functional differences. Details of the two analyses are as follows.

Analysis to achieve research objective 1: The author loaded each subcorpus onto AntConc (Anthony, 2020) to generate an unigram list, a $2 \cdot \tt { g }$ list, a 3-g list and a 4-g list. These lists can provide an overview of the formal differences in lexico-grammar acros the two subcorpora. Saliant n-grams are often interwoven with each other as found in other corpus studies. For example, in Carvalho's (2011)

Table 1 The corpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Conference</td><td>Year</td><td>Number of DS (Professor)</td><td>Number of DS (PhD)</td></tr><tr><td>International Semantic Web Conference (IswC)</td><td>2017</td><td>11</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>ACM SIGKDD Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining</td><td>2016 2018</td><td>16</td><td>16</td></tr><tr><td>Extended Semantic Web Conference (EswC)</td><td>2015</td><td>7</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV)</td><td>2018 2014</td><td>7</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>International Conference on Computational Creativity (ICCC)</td><td>2014</td><td>9</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>50</td><td>50</td></tr><tr><td>Average length</td><td></td><td>5.4 min</td><td>4.4 min</td></tr><tr><td>Tokens of the responses</td><td></td><td>20254</td><td>12569</td></tr></table></body></html>

corpus analysis, the frequent 4-g \*what do you think'" is also reflected in the frequent 3-g (i.e., \*what do you'" and "do you think"), frequent 2- $^ g$ (i.e., "do you") and frequent unigrams (i.e., "what and "do). Similarly, the major differences in this study are reflected in many n-am is, particulary in the 3-g list. herfre, the reults section will pret te list f frequent - tolict those frequent and interwoven n-grams. To determine a minimum threshold for normalised frequency (a cut-of point) for 3-g is essential to allow comparisons across the subcorpora; however, as Biber and Barbieri (2007, p. 267) observed, the frequency cut-off used to identify lexical bundes is somewhat arbitrary' (e.g., 10 per millon words [pmw], Biber et al., 199 20pmw, Hyland, 208; 40 pmw, Bber & Barbieri, 2007). These studies investigated large corpora that consist of millons of words, meaning that these thresholds are too low for the corpus under investigation. A cut-offpoint of 40 pmw would result in les than one occurrence in each subcorpus in this study for the 3-g. Therefore, the author set the threshold much higher than those in the previous studies (i.e., 450pmw), which provided approximately six to nine occurrences in each subcorpus. Most importantl, the formal diffrences observed in the n-grams were further analysed qualitatively by interpretating their functional diffrences in context, which in turn direct the second analysis.

Analysis to achieve research objective 2: The data-driven results indicate that the biggest functional diffrences across the two subcorpora pertain to how the presenters engage the discussants. The manual discourse analysis therefore draws on the engagement framework within appraisal theory (Martin & White, 2005) to comprehensively analyse the diffrent engagement strategies. The dialogic function of language modelled in appraisal theory builds on Bakhtin's (1981) concept of heteroglossia, by which the speaker/writer presents the current osition with recognition of dialogisticaltenatives. Within the dialogic engagement system, White (2003) further considered the degre to which an utterance makes allowance for dialogically alternative positions and voices. For example, dalogic expansion is the term used when greater deges of dialogic exchange occur, expressing solidarit with the audience. Dialogic expansion can be entertaining (i.e, ssessments of liklihood or uncertainty) (e.g, it's possble that ., I don't know), acknowldging (e., one cn arge that ..) and distancing (., they clamed that..). Altenatively, dialogic conraction is concerned with closing down the exchange of ther viws, incudng denying (e., there is nthi wong with ..) countring (e, howver, een though), onrring e f rse, srey), ponuncng e, it's autely cler to me tht.) ndrsing ., ome expriments hae shown that) and justifying (e.g., because). The realisations can consis of more than one word when the collocation (e.g., I think), not each single word it contains (e.g., I or think), realise a particular engagement function (e.g., entertaining). The author conducted the manual discourse analysis using the UAMCorpusTool (ODonnel, 2011, which was deigned to facilitate ystemic functional aalysis including appraisal analysis. The resuls section presents the normalised frequencies of expansion and contraction as well as extracts for illustrating how the engagement features co-articulate to create different rhetorical efects across the two subcorpora.

# 4. Results

The results of the first analysis are presented in section 4.1 followed by the results of the second analysis in sections 4.2

4.1. Differences in the functions of frequent n-grams between the two subcorpora

The first analysis has revealed three important differences regarding the 4-g 'I don't know', 3-g it's not', and the unigrams of personal pronouns. The first difference lies in the use of the 4-g 'I don't know' It is the most common 4. $^ g$ in the professor subcorpus (2.25 times per thousand words) but only occurred 0.5 ptw in the PhD subcorpus. As saliant n-grams are often interwoven, the list of 3- galso echoes this difference In Table 2, I dont ocurred 2.27 tw in the rofessor subcorpus (most frequent 3-g) but only 0.92 ptw in the PhD subcorpus. imilarly, dont know occurred 1.18ptw in the profesor subcorpus (second mos frequent 3-g) and was not listed in Table 2 for the PhD subcorpus.

Example 1 illstrates how the professors commonly use I don't know with the context of one adjacency pair that took place in one professor's DS. The discussant referenced two issues with the professor's results: but alittle lag' (as opposed to very fit) at the beginning of the season and being off by about two weeks' in the "second competition'. According to Webber's (2002) study on question types this intervention is clssed as criticism. The criticismwas then followed by a question that sought justificatio from the presenter (u, 2022). When responding to aface-threatening question, however,the profesor honesty responded with I don't know rather than defending his experiment, indicating great uncertaint. He subsequently proposed a possble reason in an attempt to stimulate further speculation and open discussion. The admission strategy allowed the audience to retain different opinions and alidated the existence of multiple osible erspective. Although a couple of PhD students alo used I don't know to realise the same function, it i uncommon, indicating that a PhD student might prefer to save face by avoiding an outright declaration of uncertainty if he/she does not have the answer or justification requested by adiscussant (Brown & Levinson, 1987). This is an interesting finding as the academic communit at large commonly expects theadmission of 'I don't know from students rather than profesors for students less experience in the field.

The second difference between novice and experienced academics pertains to the use of it's not to reject suboptimal ideas. There were 1.08 ptw cases in the PhD subcorpus (see Table 2) and only 0.72 ptw cases in the profesor subcorpus. Example 2shows how the PhD students commonly use it's not' with the context of one adjacency pair. The discussant posed a question that sought factual information about the implementation' of the experiment, such as run time' and scaling time and variables. Given that the question was fact-seeking (Xu, 2022), the reputation of the presenter is general not threatened. While the presenter is only asked to recall memories of experiment details, the PhD student interpreted the question as criticism as reflected in her defensive response. After providing some factual information, she began justifying why the run time was alittl bit limiting by providing the reason why she adopted an optimal choice of logic rather than the les ideal option. The phrase its not was used to reject the less ideal option, propositionalised logic'. The rejection marker serves the purpose of asserting the appropriateness of the presenter's choice of

Table 2 Frequent $_ { 3 - g }$ in the two subcorpora.   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="5"> Professor</td><td colspan="5">PhD</td></tr><tr><td>Rank</td><td>Frequency N/1000</td><td>Raw frequency</td><td>Range</td><td>3-g</td><td>Rank</td><td>Frequency N/1000</td><td>Raw frequency</td><td>Range</td><td>3-g</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>2.17</td><td>42</td><td>22</td><td>i don&#x27;t</td><td>1</td><td>1.08</td><td>13</td><td>6</td><td>it&#x27;s not</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>1.18</td><td>23</td><td>13</td><td>don&#x27;t know</td><td>2</td><td>1.00</td><td>12</td><td>9</td><td>a lot of</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>0.98</td><td>19</td><td>4</td><td>some kind of</td><td>3</td><td>0.92</td><td>11</td><td>7</td><td> i don&#x27;t</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>0.92</td><td>18</td><td>9</td><td> you have to</td><td>4</td><td>0.83</td><td>10</td><td>6</td><td>it&#x27;s a</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>0.82</td><td>16</td><td>11</td><td>that&#x27;s a</td><td>5</td><td>0.83</td><td>10</td><td>8</td><td>so it&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>6</td><td>0.77</td><td>15</td><td>10</td><td>a lot of</td><td>6</td><td>0.83</td><td>10</td><td>6</td><td>we don&#x27;t</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td>0.72</td><td>14</td><td>11</td><td>it&#x27;s not</td><td>7</td><td>0.75</td><td>9</td><td>6</td><td>don&#x27;t have</td></tr><tr><td>8</td><td>0.67</td><td>13</td><td>10</td><td>so i think</td><td>8</td><td>0.67</td><td>8</td><td>7</td><td>and i think</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td>0.67</td><td>13</td><td>9</td><td>i think it</td><td>9</td><td>0.67</td><td>8</td><td>5</td><td>i think that</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td>0.67</td><td>13</td><td>9</td><td>i think that</td><td>10</td><td>0.67</td><td>8</td><td>5</td><td>we didn&#x27;t</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>0.61</td><td>12</td><td>9</td><td>it&#x27;s a</td><td>11</td><td>0.58</td><td>7</td><td>6</td><td>this is a</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>0.56</td><td>11</td><td>7</td><td> you know the</td><td>12</td><td>0.58</td><td>7</td><td>6</td><td>we have a</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>0.51</td><td>10</td><td>7</td><td>and then you</td><td>13</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>and then we</td></tr><tr><td>14</td><td>0.51</td><td>10</td><td>7</td><td> i mean the</td><td>14</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>and this is</td></tr><tr><td>15</td><td>0.51</td><td>10</td><td>5</td><td>that is a</td><td>15</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>can have a</td></tr><tr><td>16</td><td>0.51</td><td>10</td><td>4</td><td> like you know</td><td>16</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>6</td><td>i think it</td></tr><tr><td>17</td><td>0.46</td><td>9</td><td>9</td><td> so this is</td><td>17</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>if it s</td></tr><tr><td>18</td><td>0.46</td><td>9</td><td>8</td><td>you know i</td><td>18</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>5</td><td>so that s</td></tr><tr><td>19</td><td>0.46</td><td>9</td><td>7</td><td>but i think</td><td>19</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>the number of</td></tr><tr><td>20</td><td>0.46</td><td>9</td><td>7</td><td>one of the</td><td>20</td><td>0.50</td><td>6</td><td>4</td><td>the the</td></tr></table></body></html>

Example 1: Non-native English speaker (Professor)

Question: I know you $\# ^ { 1 1 }$ just won't notice # the first competition # that on the graph you did the actuals to your forecast yeah very fit but there's a little lag $\#$ in the beginning of the season $\#$ and then the second competition you mentioned that was you're off by about 2 weeks as well yeah do you have well you said you have something working on $<$ event desc $=$ "camera turns to the screen"/ $>$ do you have anything to share $<$ event desc $=$ "camera turns back to speaker"/ $>$ any ideas why that may be happening or things that are looked in to improve.

Response: #I don't know that'sthe #I don't know that there's a particular reason just for that #I think #I think its a matter of # knowing # in the working with $\#$ that particular countries# ...

implementation. Although this phrase was les common in the professor subcorpus, the function is similar when it occurs

The third difference between novice and experienced academic responses in DSs pertains to the use of one kind of unigram, pronouns. It i reflected in the 3-g in Table 2 - many 3-g from the professor subcorpus included the second person pronoun, you', whereas many 3-g from the PhD subcorpus included the firt-person pronoun we. The statistics of the unigrams of personal pronouns 'you', 'we' and 'I' in the whole corpus is presented in Table 3.

The number of you' in the professor subcorpus almost doubles that of the PhD subcorpus (24 ptw and 13 ptw, respectively). Generally, the professors used 'you' for three purposes. First, approximately $5 2 \%$ of the occurrences address the discussant or the audience directly, such as 'thank you' and 'you're totally right'. Second, $2 3 \%$ of the occurrences involve the audience in a given context. For example, in the utterance to me this is important because in dbpdia you have the dbpdia ontology, but you don't know which are the roperties in the info boxes', the pronoun you invites the audienceto imagine what would happen in a given case. These two functions are similar to the "specific" and "generic" uses of "you' found in conference presentations (Webber, 2005) with the former referring specificall to the audience and the latter retaining something of its second-person meaning and appealing to the hearer's experience of life in general. Their percentages found in this study are similar to those of Fernandez Polo's (2018) study of

Example 2: Non-native English speaker (PhD)

Question: # It's possible that I missed it on the slides $<$ kinesic desc $=$ "speaker nods head' $^ { 1 } >$ but can you say anything about some 3f the like run time or scaling time and variables or that sort of thing or whatever implementation you've got right now?

Response: <kinesic desc $=$ "nods head' $^ { \prime } >$ yeah, so the run time $<$ kinesic desc $= ^ { 1 }$ 'walks to the left" $>$ ... it's a little bit limiting just because it's first order of logic it's not this propositionalised logic so you can you can start to see some of those rules are showing where you have kind of causes and causes and additional steps when you have a lot of variables ...

Table 3 Frequencies of personal pronouns in the two subcorpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Personal pronoun</td><td> Professor</td><td>PhD students</td></tr><tr><td>You</td><td>24 ptw</td><td>13 ptw</td></tr><tr><td>We</td><td>17 ptw</td><td>24 ptw</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>26 ptw</td><td>16 ptw</td></tr></table></body></html>

conference presentations. Considering the close relationship between DSs and conference presentations, these findings may indicate that the professors conformed to the norms of the use of "you' while the PhDs underused it. Finally, $2 5 \%$ of 'you' in the professor subcorpus served as part of the discourse marker you know'. In conversations, you know is often used to welcome the audience to accept a given proposition as mutual knowledge even if he audience does not know what the speaker i talking about (Ostman, 1981). In DSs, the marker helps build camaraderie between the presenter and the audience.

In contrast, you know barely occurs in the PhD subcorpus, although the few occurrences did realise the three functions mentioned above. On the other hand, the PhD students used the first-person pronoun we more frequently, especiall the exclusive we', as in'we selected the key frames and we want to make sure that. In both instances, the audience is typically excluded. As amost ll the studies investigated were team projects, the choice of we rather than I is understandable; however, the professors often used the singular to refer to their research actions in the past or personal opinions. Other times, I served as part of the discourse marker I mean' in the professor subcorpus. It can draw addresees atention and warn of upcoming adjustments (Fox Tree & Schrock, 2002) however, this discourse marker rarely occurred in the PhD subcorpus.

The three general differences derived from the corpus-driven data provide insights into the rhetorical tendencies in the two subcorpora. The choice of admission (i., I dont know) and the use of you for involving the audience uggest that the profesors tend to engage the audience whil giving reponses and that they prefer to be honest and allow for dscussion of different opinions. They are not afraid to take responsibility for thir research through the use of the first-peron singular. The PhD students, however, engage less with the audience in their reonses. When they do engage, they exhibit deesive language (i.. it's ot) and shift fullreonsibility away from themselves by using the exclusive we' to refer to the research team. The extremely low occurrences of the discourse markers you know' and I mean' also indicate that the PhD students are les spontaneous in DSs than in daily conversations. As found in the Cambridge and Nottingham Corpus of Discourse in English (CANcODE) and the spoken corpus of British English (OKeff et al. 2007), these two phrases are the most frequent 2-g in informal conversations. This suggests that the PhD students in ths study may have treated DSs as a genre more similar to research articles and hence their speech was more formal and lesspontaneous.

The two n-grams, I don't know and its not', help presenters engage with the audience and make allowances for dialogically alternative positions to diffrent extents (to a large extent with 'I don't know and to a more limited extent with its not'). These findings, however, are not conclusive without further exploration of all posible engagement markers, which is presented in the next two sections.

# 4.2. Differences in the use of engagement markers between the subcorpora

As shown in Table 4, the professors used more expansion markers (44.04 ptw) than the PhD students (25.45 ptw) (e.g., I elie, I think, I don't know, can, may, would, could, probably, sugested), whereas the PhD students used more contraction markers (35.76 ptw) than the professors (26.67 ptw) (e.g., no, but, even if, should, just of course, because). In addition, the PhD students used more contraction markers (35.76 ptw) than expansion markers (25.45 ptw) and the professors used more expansion markers (44.04 ptw) than contraction markers (26.67 ptw). These findings confirm the general tendencies indicated by the corpus-driven data, namely, the professors are more welcoming for different opinions while the PhD students are more defensive. Two adjacency pairs from each subcorpus are presented below to provide the context of the interactions and illustrate how the engagement markers co-articulate to create different rhetorical effects.

# 4.2.1. Co-articulation of engagement markers in the PhD subcorpus

Example 3 presents the interaction between a discussant and a presenter who is a PhD student. She received a question about the completenes of her analysis. She irst directly answered haven't done that analysis and then gave a justification, which directed the audience to a specific interpretation of the reason by using the justifying marker because, which does not give dialogic spaceto other possible interpretations. The clause how to do it .. i projected by the denying marker 'not completely obvious, which rects the audience members who think that the point of contention i in fact ovious. She also assumed that the perspective of the framework as problematic is common knowledge through her use of the justifying marker since, giving no dialogic space for other views. The denying marker not just potentially rejects the audience members who holdifferent viewpoints. Overall this PhD student directed the audience to her justifications and rejected alternative views to defend her research choice.

The presenter in Example 4 is a PhD student. The discussant raised a question about generating new data. To address this question, the PhD student directly answered with we don't do that'. This statement was followed by the contract marker but' to flag the counter-claim that although he did not generate new data, it i quite simple to do so. This marker targets audience members who may

Table 4 Statistics of Engagement markers of the two subcorpus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Engagement</td><td>Professor ptw</td><td>PhD ptw</td><td>TStat</td><td>Significance</td></tr><tr><td>Contract</td><td>26.67</td><td>35.76</td><td>2.586</td><td>+++ P &lt; 0.02</td></tr><tr><td>Expand</td><td>44.04</td><td>25.45</td><td>2.310</td><td>++ P &lt; 0.05</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>70.71</td><td>61.21</td><td>2.166</td><td>++ p &lt;0.05</td></tr></table></body></html>

Example 3: Native English speaker (PhD)

Question: ... so I guess that is complete?

Answer: That's a good question $<$ kinesic $\mathrm { d e s c } = " 1 0 0 \mathrm { k } s \mathrm { u p " } >$ and we haven't done that analysis and it's partially because [Justify] # it's # to me it's not [Deny] completely obvious how to do it with this problematic $\#$ framework that it makes as well as $\#$ having the constraints $\#$ so since [Justify] something that's you know not [Deny] just the standard procedure.

think that he is not capable of generating new data, which closes the dialogic space for them He then directed the audience to  specific reason why it is quite simple by using the justifyig marker because' It is fllowed by a proclam marker, of course, that flags the reason as being obvious. This discursive behaviour further closes the dialogic space for other interpretations of how simple i is to generate new data. The proclaim marker also implies that the discussant's question is not good because the answer, it can generate new data' is projected by 'of course' as being obvious. Ultimately, the presenter sought to deend his ability to conduct a certain experimental task.

4.2.2. Co-articulation of engagement markers in the professor subcorpus

The presenter in Example 5is a professor. The discussant posed a question seeking further details about the coding process. The professor first admitted that he did not know the code well and admitted that his assistant knew it better than him. This answer may have come as a source of surprise for audience members and as a disappointment to the iscussant however, the professor sucessully used humour t reduce the tension intead of defending himself. Although he did not know the code well the professor continued to engage the audience and address the question directl by making a postulation with reference to what his ssistant had told him. The postulation, yes', is projected by the entertaining marker I believe', which allows for the possbility of a'no' answer. The second entertaining marker, I don't know, further opens up the dialogic space to acknowledge other possibilities. This professor took an honest and humorous approach and engaged the audience by welcoming different viewpoints.

The presenter in Example 6 is a professor. He received a justification-seeking question (Xu, 2022) that challenged his definition of knowledge graph Instead of taking a defensive position, this professr admitted that the defintion was arguable. He then offered a set of propositions, noting that the definition depended on the scale of the schema. Most of the propositions are grounded by the entertaining marker I think', allowing the profesor to commit to a viewpoint whil sigallng a recognition of alternativeviewpoints. The subjectivity of the last proposition is signalld by another entertaining marker, might, which allows the listeners to interpret his knowledge of the matter under consideration as limited to some degre, and thereby to construe it as one position among a range of alternative positions. In this case, the professor provided justifications whileallowing space for respectful disagreement.

4.2.3. Difference in the total number of engagement markers between the subcorpora

This study also identified a difference in the total number of engagement markers. As shown in Table4, the PhD subcorpus included a lower number f engagement occurrence (61.21ptw) than the professor subcorpus (70.71ptw). To demonstrate this difference, one example from each subcorpus is given below.

The presenter in Example 7 is a professor. The discussant asked if the presenter did something further for the training test The presenter first gave a direct answer, indicating that he did not do what the discussant asked about. Next, he predicted a possibility with great uncertainty by using entertain markers, such as 'I don't know', I think', would', probably' and 'maybe', which open up the dialogic space for other viewpoints. He then fered a proposition by referencing another presenter of the conference, taking a neutral position by using the acknowledging marker sugested'. This reporting verb not only overtly construes the communicative setting as

Example 5: Native English speaker (Professor)

Questions: I was wondering, did you make any use of the vector instructions on the CPU or is it just straight serial execution?

Answer: I was standing there I thought I was off the hook you know that $<$ kinesic desc $=$ 'arms forward' $>$ nobody is going to ask me questions then nobody would know that I did not write the damn code myself I mean I did $<$ vocal $\mathtt { d e s c } = \mathtt {" l a u g h s " } >$ right and my asstant is better at this sort of thing than I am #I believe [Entertain] the answer to your question is <kinesic desc $=$ "thumbs $\mathsf { u p } ^ { \mathfrak { N } } >$ yes $\#$ right # he had talked to me about vector instructions but I do not know [Entertain] whether the current code has vector instructions in it.

Example 6: Native German speaker (Professor)

Question: Do you think that's really the definition of what a knowledge graph should be <vocal desc $=$ "rising tone">

Answer: This is of arguable right # the problem is # that it is domain-specific knowledge graph data # they usually or often have a very smallschema so they have like thre four diffrent classes and #I think [Entertain] these knowledge graphs these large scale ones like wikidata dbpedia # they are much different from that and I think [Entertain] for that you also need different methods so t aso makes sense to distinguish that # and I think [Entertain] that on these pecific knowledge graphs which have a fairly small schema # other methods might [Entertain] work better or worse than thosethat work on these very diverse and # also in the terms of the schema large scale graphs.

heteroglosic but grounds the external viewpoint as subjective and individual, thereby allowing for other viewpoints. This i followed by another entertain marker, might, to further welcome different views. The last proposition is also given dialogic space by using the entertain markers I don't know' and 'maybe'. Although the professor did not consider the particular aspect introduced by the discussant in his training test, he engaged with the audience and other presentations to explore possibilities for mutual knowledge creation.

Unlike the professor in Example 7, the student in Example 8 barely engaged with the discussant. The discussant asked the speaker if she considered how one partcular variable- the authoritativenes of artice -might affct the findings. The PhD student gave a direct answer of 'no' and briefly repeated what she did and what she did not do. The speech did not further engage the audience in an exploration of the importance of the variable noted by the discusant. Throughout the encounter, no negotiation of claims took place. The PhD student did not try to justify her research choice or co-construct knowledge claims with the discussant. Such situation did not occur in the profesor subcorpus. This dfference is also reflected in the length of DSs and the total number of tokens in responses (see Table 1). The shorter DSs and fewer tokens of the PhD subcorpus are likely due to less engagement with the audience.

# 5. Discussion

The study identified several lexico-grammatical differences through the data-driven analysis and the discourse analysis, regardless of the presenters' L1 background. Whereas the professors' rhetorical behaviours strongly aligned with the generic features found in previous studies, the PhD students' rhetorical behaviours deviated from generic norms.

The professors directly engaged discussants and audience members conforming to the generic norm of prioritising interaction and involvement (Carter-Thomas & Rowley-Jolivet, 2005; Mauranen et al., 2010). For example, the professors often used personal pro nouns (e.g, you, I) and ollquial phrases (e.g., you know, I mean) to invite the audience to imagine possbilitie in a given scenario, welcome the audience to accept a given proposition as mutual knowledge, or to draw attention to upcoming adjustments. The results of this study align with Thompson's study (2002) on the norms of hard science DSs, in which he noted a focus on hypotheticals and the research processand found that presenters ofen used pronouns to involve the audience. The current study also identifie trategies

Example 7: Native Indonesian speaker (Professor)

Question: I gues the answer is already no but with the training test, did you ask the respondents whether their impression of the poem changed after they were told it was machine # generated?

Response: We did not actually tell he answer, we just asked them to annotate whether they thought it was man or machine #I don't know [Entertain] #I think [Entertain] there would probably [Entertain] be # maybe [Entertain] # achange # it was interesting yesterday Michael suggested [Acknowledge] that there might [Entertain] actuall be a sort of positive bias the worst artefacts are generated # # the whatever knowingly generated by computer I don't know [Entertain] maybe [Entertain] this is specific to the games community being very sort of accepting towards this.

Example 8: Native Chinese speaker (PhD)

Question: Has it been checked by a journalist $\#$ was that article more likely to be authoritative in English and Chinese because obviously you are trying to find the discrepancy between the boxes, but I imagine certain artcles would be more authoritative?

Answer: Oh we just $\#$ align to the info box and $\#$ we only use the $\#$ article usage information not the content yeah.

adopted by the professors that were not mentioned as generic norms in previous studies. For example, the professors took re sponsibility for their research by using the first-person singular pronoun, I. On the one hand, they often expanded their response by exploring possible results using different methods or parameters, which helped engage audience members in the meaningful co-construction of knowledge claims. Other the other hand, they borrowed external viewpoints through reporting verbs to strengthen heteroglossic and polyphonic communication.

The PhD students tried to answer questions directly rather than engage in an extended discussion with the audience. Some of their responses attempted to convey an understanding of the question or sought to address the question directly rather than providing postulations or further comments. This led to responses shorter in length compared to professors responses. Their peeches tended to be formal rather than spontaneous, which could be attributed to their familirity with the lexico-grammatical features in research writing rather than those in research speaking.

The exploration of engagement markers also revealed that when engagement behaviours took place, the professors adopted a welcoming voice by using more expansion markers (e.g,I don't know, I think, I believe, might, can) than contraction markers (e.g., it's not, of course, because). The expansion markers indicate the subjectivity of the proposition under consideration and thereby acknowledge other possbilitis and welcome diffrent opinions. The author even identified this strategy in responses that addressed criticism from the audience. The professors avoided defensive language and instead positioned themseles as honest and passionate researchers. This elf-positioning strategy aligns with the generic norms found by Querol-Julian (2011) and Webber (2002). Moreover, the co-texts in the analysis indicated that the professors applied humour to reduce tension or save face as another way to avoid a defensive position. As Wulff et al. (2009) observed, presenters primarily introduced laughter episodes in DSs through exaggeration, hyperbole, banter, irony, ambiguous allusions, pratfals, misunderstandings, jokes, funny stories and the use of funny voices and parodies. In the DS context, laughter seems to strengthen the solidarity of the group, as the community members share insider knowledge that give [s] rise to a rather knowing kind of laughter (Wulffet al., 2009, p. 86). As Webber (2002) noted, unlike political debates, academic DSs are jointl constructed ventures between presenters and discussants served by politeness and solidarity.

Unlike the professors, the PhD students interpreted most questions as justification-seeking and therefore took more cautious positions to defend their research choices and capabilities. They used more contraction markers (e.g, it's not of course, since) than expansion markers to asert their propositions and close the dialogic space to other viewpoints. As part of a defensive approach, some PhD presenters also shifted responsibility to the whole research team by using the first-person plural pronoun we'.

Although this study primarily focused on DSs in hard sciences, professors and PhD students from the soft sciences may experience comparable differences. Querol-Julian (2011) showed that the soft science DSs had a much higher percentage of dialogic expansion markers than those in the hard ciences. This could be because the soft sciences rely lesson numbers to make a point; subjective claims may demand more extensive negotiations and discussions, which can pose additional challenges to novice academics.

# 6. Conclusion

This study has explored the rhetorical differences in DS responses iven by noviceacademics and professors with a focus on lexico. grammatical features. The analysis f lexico-rammatical features innovatively adopted a data-driven analysis f frequent nrams and their functions as the precursor to the manual discourse analysi of the co-articulation effet of engagement markers It found that the novice academics generall took an over-cautious position while the experienced academics positioned themselves as an honest and passionate researcher.

The implications of the findings, however, are more complicated than correcting the defensive behaviours of novice academics by instructing them to use expansion markers twice as much as contraction markers like the professors in this study. Given that professors can have many assistants work on their project, the science community may be more accepting of professors' use of I don't know' when it comes to providing the details of a project. Additionall, projecting a good image is important for novice academics who are not established in the research community. I certain contexts, it might be necessry for PhD students to justify ther research rather than use hedges or phrases like I dont know' Given the dfferences in background, experience and reutation, PhD students may not achieve the same desired results by mimicking professors. Having said that, DSs is by no means similar to the genre of oral defence? which serves the purpose of interrogating the research under review and evaluating whether the candidate merits the awarding of a degree. DSs do not impose set of specified standards to les experienced academics, and hence the student identity is of much less importance compared to the kind of engagement in their formal studie. onsidering the intricate context of the novice academics, they can work towards a balance between the use of expansion and contraction markers or use slightly more expansion markers than contraction markers to help ensure better audience engagement and professional development in DSs.

This study provides rich pedagogical implications for EAP teaching. When designing and implementing EAP materials for training PhD students DS skills instructors should emphasise the co-constructive and solidarity-oriented tendencies of DS and the intricate context for novice academics, afer introducing generic features. The following activities should prioritise engagement strategies, including interpreting questions as opportunities for co-construction of knowledge, offring postulations and further comments, interacting with external viewpoints, taking ownership of the individual's share of a project, and adopting a conversational tone. The authentic examples and the linguistc realisations f engagement provided in this study can be tailored for illustratios and practies. For example, instructors can present to students a short, formal and defensive DS response with no personal pronouns, colloquial phrases (e.g., you know, I mean), expansion markers (e.g., I dont know, I thik, I elieve, might, can) but only ontraction markrs (., it's not, of course, because). Thiscan be followed by a discussion of the rhetorical effct f such speech styl and a pair work on the incorporation of engagement strategies by adding personal pronouns, colloquial phrases, expansion markers, external viewpoints and personal comments. In order to illustrate a balanced use f expansion and contraction marks, instructors should als tailor the samples of profesors (e.g., keep expansion markers only) and ask students to add a few contraction markers with the purpose of establishing a professional reutation. After adjusting the rhetoric of a few samples instructors can organise simulations of conference presentation and DS, and students can incorporate the strategies into the negotiation of their own research.

As with any research, this study has limitations which can be overcome by future studies. They may focus on the ifferences in non. verbal features or structural features across the two groups. Although this study has considered non-verbal elements as supporting information, a systematic analysis can validate the difference in, for example, the laughter episodes observed in this study. Furthermore, a structural analysis may uncover underused moves by PhD students..

# Author statement

The author completed the whole life cycle of the production of this research, including research design, data collction, data analysis and writing.

# References

Alsop, ., Kig G X  (2020.  J. H M t .), Th  gr i ch, (l.6, p. 21-0 merad Publishing Limited.   
Anthony, L. (2020). AntConc. Tokyo, Japan: Waseda University [Computer Software], Version 3.5.9.   
Bakhtin, M. M. (1981). The dialogic imagination. Austin: University of Texas Pres. translated by C. Emerson & M. Holquist.   
Biber, D., & Barbieri F. (2007). Lexical bundles in universit poken and writen register. English for Specic Purposes, 26, 263-286.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, g., onrad, S., & Finegan, E. (199). Longman grammar of spoken and witte English. Harlo: Longman.   
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. D. (1987). Politeness Some universals in language usage. Cambridge University Press.   
Carter-. -ie,  005.Thhr f c io tio: x, m d ni ol J Applied Linguistics, 15(1), 45-47. Science & Business Media.   
Fernandez Polo, F. J. (2018). Functions of "you' in conference presentations. English for Specific Purposes, 49, 14-25.   
Fox Tree, J. E., & Schrock, J. C. (2002). Basic meanings of you know and I mean. Jounal of Pragmatics, 34(6), 727-747.   
Guest, M. (2013). Japanese doctors at international medical conferences: Why the worry?Jounal of Medical English Education, 12(3), 47-55.   
Heo,    .00 a  .  .) Th conferencing (pp. 127-146). Frankfurt, Germany: Peter Lang.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Stance and engagement: A model of interaction in academic discourse. Discourse Studies, 7(2), 173-192.   
Hyland, K. (2008). As can be seen: Lexical bundles and disciplinary variation. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 4-21.   
Konzett, C. (2012). Any questions? Berlin, Boston: De Gruyter Mouton.   
Martin, J. R., & White, P. R. R. (2005). The language of evaluation: Appraisal in English. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Mane001)i   . siri. 578)A Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Mauranen, A. (2004). They're littl bit different.: Observations on hedges inacademic talk. Pragmatics, 120, 173-197. New series.   
Maane P we, J 2010 is d ick d.  wd is oo p 634 652). London, New York: Routledge.   
Morita, N. (2000). Discourse socialization. Tesol Quarterly, 34(2), 279-310.   
Nesi, H., & Gardner, S. (2012). Genres across te isciplines: Student writing in higher education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Pres.   
Nesi, H., & Thompson, P. (2006). The British Academic Spoken English Corpus Manual www.coventry.ac.uk/base.   
Oeffe, , Marthy, M, & Crer,R (2007). From copus to asso: nge se and nge tching. Cambridge: Caridge Uniesit Pre.   
ODonnell, M. (2011). CorpusTool. http://www.wagsoft.com/CorpusTool/index.html. Version 3.0.   
Ostman, J. (1981). You know: A discourse functional approach. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Quer-ia01on   si f o  p ch y r  isg   
QuerlJulin,   012im n   sio   ct d t   PpJ, 31(4) 271-283.   
QuerolJulian,  Ft-me  (2019. aorie thig ad g of intive mtimd on acdmi  for dctra ds. International Journal of English Studies, 19(2), 61-82.   
a Universitatis Gothoburgensis.   
Rendle-Short, J. (2006). The academic presentation: Situated talk in action. Aldershot UK: Ashgate Publishing Ltd.   
Shalm, . 02)   ), p 51-68). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Skelton, J. (2007). The representation of truth in academic medical writing. Applied Linguistics, 18(2-1), 121-140.   
Swales, J. (1996). Occuded genres in the academy: The case of the submission letter Pragmatics Beyond: New Series, 41, 45-58.   
The ritish . 0.  it in   l t  i h/w. natcorp.ox.ac.uk/.   
Thompson, 202.A th ty nfd Th  orrti  h ption.  l ha mon s.), Th conferencing (pp. 147-168). Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
Tpson0  h .)    . 1913) Basingstoke, UK: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Ventla  (19. s sg a   d  n     a r s.  i  enk, E. Ventola (Eds.), Coherence in spoken and written discourse (pp. 101-123). Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Vea 02).    ..)T 5-50) Frankfurt: Peter Lang.   
eber, . 202)  i   i h   .,  753).  er Lang.   
Webber, P. (2005). Interactive features in medical conference monologue. Eng. Spe. Purp. J., 24(2), 157-181.   
White, P. R. R. (2003). Beyond modality and hedging: A dialogic view of the language of intersubjective stance. Text, 23(2), 259-284. 28, 79-92.   
u, 202.  g asi f qins d   s a   ri oe sciish for i Purposes, 66, 63-76.   
u,   019  i tii t  rish .    96, 797-818.