# A scaffolded speaking and writing ELP course for commercial lawyers: An action research case study from an undergraduate law school in Istanbul\*

Anthony Townley

Nagoya University of Commerce and Business, 4-4 Sagamine, Komenoki-cho, Nisshin-shi, Aichi-ken, 470-0193, Japan

# ARTICLEINFO

Handling Editor: Guangwei Hu

Keywords:   
Action research   
English for specific legal purposes (ELP)   
Genre analysis   
Scaffolded learning   
Professional role play   
CLIL pedagogy

# ABSTRACT

The author used action research to implement significant changes to an English for Specific Legal Purposes (ELP) course at a private university in Istanbul to meet the professional discourse needs of Turkish law students. The previous syllabus was focused on American Supreme Court case reports; however most of the students would mainly use English to advise on contracts in commercial law practice. Content and language integrated learning (CLIL) and genre analytical methodologies were used to develop pedagogy for the new syllabus, which was scaffolded so that students began learning the functional organization and lexico-grammatical properties of a contract before participating in an oral advice role play activity and writing a letter of advice about it to a hypothetical client. In conjunction with discussion of the pedagogical rationales for syllabus design and instructional activities, observations of student participation in the oral advice activity and feedback on a student example of the letter assessment are presented to critically reflect on the utility of this ELP course designed to help undergraduate law students to discursively function as lawyers, especially those learners from non-English speaking backgrounds, who need to communicate in English as the primary lingua franca for international legal practice.

# 1. Introduction

In this article, I use first person enquiry common in action research to report on the inovative changes made to an Englis for egal Purposes (ELP) course to help prepare undergraduate Turkish law students for the legal discourse practice of advising clients about commercial contracts in English. I irst provide a context for my own professonal background before explaining the action research rationales and methodologies that I used for making transformative changes to the existing ELP syllabus. This artcle then examines the extent to which these changes produced improvements in the teaching and learning environment of the ELP course and the positive outcomes observed in formative and summative assessment results.

My professional life has been divided into two main phases of first practising commercial law in Austrli from 1998 to 2008 and then working in a variet f academic teaching roles in the feld of English for Specific Purposes (ESP), with a pecial interest in legal and businesprofessional communication. When designing the ELP course in 2012, I criticall rflected on my experiences as a law student and junior traine lawyer in Austrlia and how I ner received any forml training in efective legal comunication. Instead, had to develop the requisite professonal understandings, interpersonal communication skills and formal writing skills by problematizing what were \*conventionalised or institutionalised textual features in the context of specific institutional and disciplinary practices' (Bhatia, 2002, p. 6) with senior colleagues in the workplace. This type of language learning relates to the process of apprenticeship and induction into \*communities of practice (Wenger, 198; Wenger, McDermott, & Snyder, 2002), whereby learning to function discursively as alawyer is developed through \*social practice in which language and disciplinary knowledge play a sig. nificant role' (Bak & Murphy, 2008, p. 199).

This extemporary, time-consuming process of discursive apprenticeship becomes necessary for trainee lawyers around the world because most undergraduate law schools do not provide any specific language training or planned instruction about how to communicate as a legal professonal. A significant implication for law graduates is that while they may acquire a passive familiarity with key contractual genres from formal education, they are not always able to produce situation-specific examples of such genres and remain relatively unaware of the discursive realities of situated practice in the legal-professonal workplace (Bhatia, 2004, 2008)

These pedagogical limitations underpin the need to design undergraduate ELP courses that focus on the defining characteristics of legal language used in professional practce as established through action research in applied linguistics. In order to frame my action research observations and reflect on my teaching and on student learning, I posed the following questions:

(1) What types of instructional activities develop the content knowledge and discourse skill related to working as a lawyer in English?   
(2) How can teaching for assessment help to shape this ELP development?

# 2. Action research rationales and methodologies

This study i described as action reearch in the sense that my goals were to make changes to the existing ELP course syllabus as a means of improvement (Rose, Rose, Farrington, & Page, 2008), while at the same time increasing knowledge about ELP pedagogy, and concomitant teaching and learning practices (Crookes, 1993; Gibbs et al., 2016; Ronen, 2020). For action research change to be meaningful and sustainable, Banegas and Consoli (2020) argue that it should be "based on careful, well-thought-out action and reflection, and i should resond to context, agents, and isues which riger such transformations (p.176). This etion2 disssesthe main pedagogical rationales for action reearch intervention and my teacher/researcher considerations that helped inform the design Of the ELP course.

# 2.1. Contextual needs analysis

The ELP course formed part of the English for Academic Purposes (EAP) and English for Specific Purposes (ESP) portfolio of content-based writing courses of the university, which implements English as the medium of intruction (EMI) for most content-based courses acrossthe entire curculum as a privat foundation) university in Turkey (Macaro & Akincioglu, 2017). Even though the ELP course was conceptually designed to enable Turkish undergraduate law students to \*use the English language in legal writing as practicing lawyers", the contents of the syllabus that I inherited was inappropriate in meeting these pedagogical goals. Students were primarily taught to write case notes for United States Supreme Court decisions despite the reality that only a very small number of law students ever go on to post-graduate study or legal practice in America.

Needs analysisis recognized as the critical first stage in ESP course development to determine learners' goals and backgrounds and the situations they will ned to communicate in, which i followed by syllabus design, materials selection, methodology, asessment and evaluation (Flowerdew, 2013). As an important part of the needs analysis process that I intiated to understand the specific learning needs of the undergraduate law students, the results from a student survey identified that most of them intended to work in private commercial law practice in Turkey after graduation.

Further analysis of the legal services market in Turkey indicated that most legal work in English is undertaken with Turkey's closest and largest trading markets in European countries. As a lingua franca of legal and business discourse throughout Europe (Cogo & Jenkins, 2010), particularly for contract law purposes (Campos, 2010), the proficient use of legal English is has become a necessary ability for Turkish lawyers who need to negotiate and drat trade agreements, service arrangements, and other types of contractual documents in English. Based on this task-ased approach to needs analysis that utilized multiple source and methods (Gilabert, 2005), it was apparent that most of my students would benefit from learning how to advise clients about commercial contracts in English.

# 2.2. The trouble with ELP textbook materials

I began the first year of teaching the ELP course in 2012 by primarily using textbook materials to help students understand commercial law principles in English and the lexical meaning of contract. One f the textbooks included materials about the types and structures of commercial agreements used under European law and the types of terms and conditions common to those contracts. In terms of contract drafting strategie, the textbook contains exercises that promote student ssessment of the schematic structure of a contract and the operative meaning of is terms and conditions. While students were able to learn the rhetorical organization and certain linguistic features of English contracts, the syllabus did not include any linguistic-based activities for them to apply this knowledge to the use of contracts in simulated legal practice.

The pedagogical limitations that I experienced with ELP textboos align with the findings from a review undertaken by Candlin Bhatia, and Jensen (2002) of 37textbooks published for the ELP context. While it was noted that most ELP textboos do make efforts to "authenticat their materials (p.302) it is not possble for geeric textbook materials toaccurately represent the form or features of linguistic discourse that professonal legal practice has established. One of the main findings from the review was that most textbook activities are formulated in isolation and fail to \*stablish continuity throughout the materials by linking the materials linguistically or discursively" (Candin et al. 2002, p.310). These indigs helped inform my action rearch proces that ffective ELP is therfore not simply a matter of teaching the ingustic features of legal texts but also teaching students a way of interacting and communicating based on knowledge of a type of contextual, professional discourse.

# 2.3. Action research

For effective ESP syllabus design, action research is best understood and implemented with clearly defined pedagogies that address the professional communication requirements of the learners (Banegas & Consoli, 2020). As identified in my needs analysis proces, one of the most fundamental discourse activities for the majority of my Turkish law students, was to provide cient advice about the operational meaning of commercial contracts in legal practice. My main pedagogical focus for the revised ELP course was therefore to design a task-based syllabus that was scaffolded to ast  undergraduate law students to develop their understanding of a authentic commercial contract witten in nglish, while improving their control over the discourses for giving both oral and written client advice in English.

# 2.4. Content and language integrated learning (CLIL)

Syllabus design for the ELP course also involved the pedagogical concept of content and language integrated learning (CLIL), which was developed as an approach to language teaching and learning in the fields of English as a Second Language (ESL), EAP and ESP. More specifically, Banegas (2018) notes how CLIL and ESP complement each other in the ways that both focus on authentic subject matter knowledge and language awareness-based activities. CLIL pedagogy is diffrent to the concept of EMI, which is more narrowly defined as the use of English to teach academic subjects (other than Englis itel) when English is not the teacher's first language or that of either the students in thir lecture rom or the majorit of the population in their country' (Dearden & Macaro, 2016, p. 466) The focus for EMI pedagogy is on teaching thesubject content in English and does not have explicit language learning aims. The limited role that English language development plays in EMI contexs iffers from the dual-focused CLIL approach in which nglish is used for the learning and teaching of both content and English as a second language (Coyle, Hood, & Marsh, 2010).

The key epistemological rationales for using CLIL for this ELP course are that L2 learners can acquire knowledge of commercial law concepts and practice, learn discipline specific terminology associated with authentic contract materials and develop a particular set of discourses for providing legal advice in English. CLIL i now a global teaching and learning methodology used in education contexts where English is used as an additional language, which has ben re/interpreted, adapted, and extended with the use of genre and register analysis, sociolinguistics, and systemic functional linguistics (Darvin, Lo, & Lin, 2020).

# 2.5. Genre analytical methodology

For ELP teaching and learning pedagogy, I primarily used genre-based educational theory for the constructive ways it can describe how texts, and discursive practices enshrined in texts, are shaped by genre conventions. Particularly in the field of ESP, the effectiveness of genre pedagogy is evidenced by the degree to which it has helped researchers and leaners acquire knowledge of the communicative purposes, schematicstructures, and lingustic features of a diverse range of academic and professional genres over the past few decades (Paltridge, 2013). More pecifically, I used Swalesean move and step analysis for this ELP course, similar to the methodologies I have used to analyse contract negotiation practices (Townley, 2016, Townley, 2019, Townley, 2022) and to develop discursive maps for ELP pedagogy (Townley, 2021). According to Swales (1990, 2004), an established genre typically demonstrates a series of Moves", which can be thought of as part of a text that achieves a particular functional purpose. Each move can also involve a number of constituent elements called "Steps".

# 2.6. Authentic materials

Pinner (2013) identifies that the word content in CLIL is "almost synonymous with authenticity" (p.46), because authenticity is "directly related to the purpose of being in the classoom, and the learning aims and outcomes of the entire curriculum' (p.47). An important challenge for the CLIL teacher is therefore to nsure that content matrials are authentic which refer to texts or samples of language from the target language context. The concept of authenticity is also central tothe type of tasks set by the CLIL instructor to facilitate interactions that use the target language in authentic and unrehearsed situations (Banegas, 2018). For Coyle et al. (2010), CLIL achieves authenticity through \*authenticit of purpose", which relates to the types of genres used in the target context to achieve shared communicative goals (Swales, 1990). In terms of learning experiences, Pinner (2013) found that the use of authentic materials motivates students because they offer them the possbility to learn about relevant content as wellas improve their English language skills.

# 2.7. CLIL instructor role

The role of the intructor is also important for the design and delivery of an efective CLll course, which ideall requires someone

Table 1 ELP course syllabus.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Week</td><td>Instructional activities &amp; materials</td><td>CLIL leaning objectives sequence (including scaffolding)</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>: Discussion-based introduction to the discursive roles and practices of commercial lawyers. : Particular focus on working with contracts in English in international</td><td>: Content knowledge of the real-world context of international legal practice, the professional relationship between lawyer and client, and the discursive processes for providing client advice about commercial contracts in English.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>commercial law practice. : Introduction to genre analysis and how it can be used to understand the rhetorical organization and linguistic features of the Purchase Agreement (the contract).</td><td>: Content knowledge of the functional organization of the contract for its intended business law purpose, including the use of headings and the schematic relationships between different parts of the contract as a type Of legal genre.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>: Teaching materials explain the &quot;structure, style and intended audience&quot; of the contract (Swales, 1990). : Define the operational meaning of each contractual provision, in relation to its particular business law purpose.</td><td>: Content knowledge of the business practices and contract law concepts regulated by the Purchase Agreement, including confidentiality,</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>: Vocabulary lists with matching gap-fill exercises to help explain the different contractual provisions (synonyms for technical legal terms). : Sentence completion exercises to test comprehension ( missing words).</td><td>intellectual property, warranties and indemnity. : Language knowledge of the operational meaning of the different contractual provisions, and how certain provisions interoperate with others. : Language knowledge of the lexical and grammatical properties of</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>: Teach the lexical and grammatical features of the contractual provisions, written in legalese to define the rights, obligations and powers of the Buyer and Seller.</td><td>contractual provisions written in the technical discourse of legalese, including the use of passive voice, nominalization and complex sentence</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>: Explanatory grammar worksheets for contractual provisions with</td><td>structures with embedded clauses.</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>complex clause structures and syntactic properties.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>: Sentence completion exercises using target grammatical properties and</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td> patterns.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>: Teach students how to paraphrase legalese into plain English language</td><td>: Language focus on paraphrase writing skills in plain English, which are</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>to advise clients. : Paraphrase writing exercises with model answers written in plain</td><td>also be used for the subsequent oral and written assessment tasks in the scaffolded ELP syllabus.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Lesson 1 TERMINOLOGY ASSESSMENT $\left( 1 5 \% \right)$

# Lesson 2

. Provide written feedback on assessment.   
: Discuss the oral role-play process and discourse expectations of the oral assessment grading rubric.   
: Teach the linguistic process for giving client advice using a set of prompts and textualized conversations to model the roleplay activities.   
. Dialogic learning materials are designed to show students how to paraphrase legalese into simplified language that clients can understand in response to questioning.

# Lesson 1

: Provide the designated groups of students with the opportunity to practice giving oral advice together in class. : Instructor monitors the different groups of students and provides oral feedback to guide participation.

Lesson 2 ORAL ASSESSMENT $\mathrm { ( 2 5 \% ) }$ -

. Provide written feedback for oral assessment.   
: Discussion-based introduction to the use of the IRAC framework in legal practice using schematic diagram of the different functional elements.   
: Demonstrate how the IRAC framework is used in the legal letter of advice genre.   
: Linguistic-based examination of each of the nine moves and steps commonly used in the legal letter of advice genre.   
: Exemplar letter with descriptions of the linguistic features commonly used in each move and step.   
: Discussion of other linguistic features of the letter genre to manage interpersonal relationships between lawyer and client.   
: Provide explanatory examples of cohesive devices, the interpersonal use of pronouns and the interactional meta-discourse features of hedging and boosting.

Lesson 1 WRITTEN ASSESSMENT $\mathbf { ( 4 0 \% ) }$

# Lesson 2

Written assessment is graded, and written feedback is provided to students.

: Formative assessment to check for and evaluate student understanding of the meaning of contractual provisions and the ability to paraphrase legalese in plain English in short answer writing exercises.   
. Content knowledge of the contextual realties and discursive processes for providing legal advice orally to clients during a face-to-face meeting in legal practice.   
: Content knowledge of the professional role and discursive processes to answer questions posed by a client during a face-to-face meeting.   
: Language knowledge of the discursive processes to paraphrase legalese into plain spoken English to explain the (inter)operational meaning of the contractual provisions.   
: Content knowledge of working with other lawyers to provide advice during face-to-face client meetings.   
: Language knowledge of providing oral legal advice in plain English to clients based on roleplay practice activities.   
: Formative assessment to check for and evaluate student understanding of the contractual provisions and the ability to paraphrase legalese into plain English when giving oral advice about the (inter)operational meaning of the contract.   
: Content knowledge of the rhetorical organization of the IRAC framework for providing predictive legal advice   
: Language knowledge of the structural-functional organization of the letter of advice genre, incorporating the IRAC framework for providing legal advice.   
: Language knowledge of the lexical choices that are used in each move and step to achieve its own rhetorical purpose throughout the legal letter of advice genre.   
: Language knowledge of the meta-discourse features to facilitate coherent communication between the different moves and build a positive relationship with the client in the legal letter of advice genre.   
Summative assessment to evaluate student understanding of the letter genre and the ability to advise on a hypothetical dispute pertaining to the contract.   
: Review of the content and language knowledge acquired during the ELP course, and the potential to use genre analysis to understand the "structure, style, content and intended audience" of other legal texts (Swales, 1990) in further studies and legal practice.

Who is both a linguist and an expert in the content subject. However, the relity is that the implementation of CLIL ofte requires the collaboration between content and language specialists (Airey, 2016; Lasagabaster, 2018), due to the insufficient number of teachers who are both competent linguists and experts in the specific content subject (limova, 2012). These interpersonal and interdisciplinary partnerships can often prove problematic due to different assumptions about the role of language in knowledge constitution (Jones & McCracken, 2007). I was fortunate to be able to draw on both my experience as a commercial lawyer and as an applied linguist to design the scafflded ELP course without the need tocollaborate with other faculty, which is understandably rare and affords unique insights.

# 3. The ELP course

# 3.1. Syllabus

As a way to inroduce each section of the ELP syllabus, Table 1 outlines the instructional activities and CLIL learning objectives in a typical 12-week semester (each week consis of two 75-min lessons). The course was designed around three main assessment activities that test student knowledge of the functional meaning of technical vocabulary used in contracts $( 1 5 \% )$ , speaking skills $( 2 5 \% )$ and writing skills $( 4 0 \% )$ . A grade is also awarded for overall class participation in group activities and class discussions $( 2 0 \% )$

# 3.2. Scaffolding

The main goal of my action research was to understand how to integrate and scaffold the acquisition of content knowledge about the use of contract in commercial law practice while developing EL communication skill. In general terms, scaffolding refers to first providing students with extensive educational support and then reducing it s they develop independent competence in a skil or area of knowledge (Wood, Bruner, & Ross 1976). In terms of syllabus design, instructional activities are scaffolded to provide different types fasistance in reaching the next level of planned learning (wier, 206, p. 321). For this ELP course, the syllaus was designed to teach students how to provide legal advice by building on contextual knowledge of legal practice and the linguistic meaning of the contract already acquired.

As shown in Table 1, the CLIL ELP syllabus begins with contextual discussion of the discursive roles of commercial lawyers and activities related to the use of commercial contracts in international legal practice. Students are then introduced to the use of Swalesean move and step genre analysis to understand the commercial purpose and rhetorical structure of the Purchase Agreement as content knowledge of legal practice. We can also se that students acquire content knowledge about authentic business law practices for providing oral and written advice to clients at relevant stages during the ELP course (see Weeks 6-9).

The lexico-grammatical properties of the contact are treated as the building blocks of this linguistclly scaffolded' syllabus Jones & McCracken, 2007), which is designed to activate, check for, and interrelate knowledge of contractual content and language before teaching the discursive features and language skill needed to provide legal advice to a client, first orally and then in writing. The expectation is that long this \*cafolded lening trajectory Jones &McCracken, 2011, p. 503), the need for educational support wil decrease as students use the same contractual terminology to advise on the same contractual content for both the oral and written assessment tasks.

The grading for the sequenced assessment is also scaffolded to increase in weight as the students become more confident and proficient in providing legal advice about the contract with more time and experience participating in the ELP course. Similar to the approach taken by Seviour (2015), the weighting of the terminology assessment $( 1 5 \% )$ is designed to be "small enough to be non-threatening but significant enough to motivate students to become engaged early on' (p.86) in preparation for the larger grades for the oral $( 2 5 \% )$ and writing tasks $( 4 0 \% )$

# 3.3. Authentic materials

The effective use of authentic materials rests with learner engagement (Pinner, 2013) so I needed to source commercial contract that was not too comple or to difficul o understand for the law students. As arequirement of admission to the law faculty, the level of English language proficiency for most students ranged from B2 to C1 levels acording to the Common European Framework of Reference for Languages (CEFR), with some students at the C2 level.

Taking these isues into consideration, I used a contractitled Major Equipment Purchase Contract (the Purchase Contract) for the ELP course, which is an authentic contract used by an energy company to facilitate the purchase of equipment. For confidentiality purposes I used the contents and rhetorical organization of the contract without including the name of the company. I chose to use this six-page contract because it i relatively simple in terms of content, technical language, and rhetorical organization with only two signatory parties: the Buyer and the Seller of the equipment.

# 4. Discussion of instructional activities, assessment tasks and learning outcomes

This section discusses the specific instructional activities used for the scaffolded sections of the ELP course in more detail and explains how the action research changes made to the new syllabus were efective in preparing leaners for important discourse a. tivities in commercial law practice, as evidenced by graded observations of student participation in the oral advice activity and by a student example of the legal letter of advice asessment. This section also explains how genre analytcal methodology was used to

implement the new ELP pedagogy.

# 4.1. Contracts as a genre

The first half of the 12-week ELP course is devoted to the use of genre analysis to teach the \*structure, style, content and intended audience (Swale, 1990, p. 58) of the Purchase Agreement. The syllabus iscafolded so that students begin by understanding the functional organization of the Purchase Contract in the context of commercial law practice before learning the operational meaning of its provisions, along the macroto micro nexus of linking the social practice and semiotic resource perspectives (Candin, 1987; Candin & Crichton, 2011).

# 4.1.1. Contract functional organization

Genre analysis first involves careful consideration of the functional organization and interoperability of the different parts of the contract together with learning the specific terminology used for these structural elements (see Week 2 in Table 1). For instance, individual provisions, referred to as Cluses, Sections or Articles in professional legal practice, are commonly numbered in contracts (sometimes with titles or headings) to asist lawyers in clearly referencing specific provisions under negotiation. The most important contractual rights and obligations are rincipally defined first. Itis then customary to insert terms that apply general to most commercial contract, which are sometimes referred to as boilerplate. Many commercial contracts have the same structural composition, and knowledge of this can make it easier for learners to navigate through other complex contractual documents.

# 4.1.2. Contract purpose and business law function

Once students understand the functional organization of contracts, genre analysis is then used to explain the purpose of the Purchase Contract in its busines context (also in Week 2). Genre analysis enable learners to understand \*written communication as social engagement (Jensen, 2009, p. 7) and this Purchase Contract was drafted by lawyers representing the Buyer energy company to facilitate the purchase, delivery, and technical installation of Major Equipment presumably in connection with its core business in the energy industry. As the author of the Purchase Contract, the Buyer has significantly stronger bargaining power than the Sellr, as determined by more favourable contractual terms and conditions than the Seler (Choi & Triantis, 2012). This is important contextual information that needs to be understood by the students when giving client advice to the Sler and negotiating with the lawyers representing the Buyer.

Understanding the purpose and operation of the contract also involves learning the business practices and contract law concepts regulated by the Purchase Agreement (see Week 3). For instance, students learn how major equipment is bought and sold as a commercial transaction involving warranties to repair or replace any defects in workmanship or materials. This content knowledge also involves learning discipline specific contractual language as an integrated feature of the CLIL syllabus.

# 4.1.3. Contract language

It is esential for students to understand the legales vocabulary used in the Purchase Agrement before they can be expected to use it proficiently in the subsequent speaking and written assessment. The term legalese is used to denote the discourse medium of legal English (written and spoken), which is commonly regarded, peoratively, as a technical jargon that is difficlt to understand or use, especiall for the non-specialist (Townley, 2021; Bhatia, 1994; Tiersma, 199). Considering the 12-week time limit of the ELP course, vocabulary teaching and learning activities are restricted to the lexico-grammatical properties of the particular Purchase Contract under analysis. Notwithstanding thi constraint i is very plausible that the ocio-linguisic knowledge that students acquire about this Purchase Contract can be transferred to understanding other commercial contracts because they generally have similar linguistic features, regardless of the subject matter.

During Week 4 a variety of interactive vocabulary exercises are used to understand the use of legalese to define the rights and obligations of the Buyer and Sellr and the legal roceses for buying the equipment under the Purchase Agreement. Students are then taught to paraphrase legalese expressions into plain simpler English in Week 5, as supported by the Plain English movement to enhance textual clarit and acessbility in legal communicatio (Willams, 2004; Harti & Lu, 2014). For example the terms of intellectual property infringement i Articl 8 are expressed as follows (marked terms are highlighted in bold and underlined for analysis below):

In case the Equipment or any part thereof furnished under this Contract is held to constitute nfringement of any patent or other intelectl opt rt ad ts  s eoi n  uts r po, er shl, t ts ol e, th ore for uer the right to continue to exclusively use the Equipment or applicable part thereof, or replace the same with noninfringing Equipment that full complies with this Contract including without limitation all warranties herein), or modify it s it becomes noninfringing while continuing to fully comply wholly with this Contract (including without limitation all warranties herein).

In terms of the performative style of contractual language (Tersma, 199), there are a number of specialized technical terms for the students to learn in this small excerpt from the Purchase Contract alone (highlighted in bold). Lawyers use formal adverbs such as "thereof' to refer to any part of the purchased equipment and herein' to state that something is contained within the contract. The term "funished' simply means to be defined in the contract and \*shall is used to denote a contractual obligatin. Other terms need to be understood in relation to a legal concept (highlighted in underline). For example, students need to understand the functional meaning of "patents" as atype of inellectual property right when considering whether any part of the equipment is determined by the law to affect that right (held to constitute infringement") and becomes a court case ("enjoined in any suits or proceedings")

It is also important to address the grammatical properties and patterns of contractual provisions written in legalese, which often become imbued with the use of long sentences, nominalization and passive voice (Bhatia, 1993). In relation to the use of sentence structures comprised of multiple subordinate clauses to define complex and typically chained legal requirements, students are taught how to create shorter sentences with efective punctuation and cohesive devices when paraphrasing these contractual provisions in writing. Cohesive devices used at the beginning of shorter sentence can show the relationships between different contractual rights and obligations and lal processes more clearly, such as cause and effect (therfore thus, consequently), time (furthmore, next then, subsequently), addition (also, in addition), or comparison and contrast (however, despite, although, conversely.

Contractual rights and obligations are often constructed as nominalized forms, so that a shareholder does not resolve but makes a resolution, a buyer does not pay but makes  payment, and a party does not notify in writig, but witten notice is notified. Passive forms are also often used to emphasize the importance or salience of the action, and not the agent in legal writing (Bhatia, 194; Coulthard & Johnson, 2010). In relation to these discursive features, students larn the distinction between passive and active grammatical choices to use verbs i active sentence structures that would in the passve voice be expressed by noun forms as the subject of the sentence. The active voice makes the sentence clearer to understand by irs identifying the relevant contractual party as the subjectat the beginning of the sentence and then defining their contractual rights or obligations using verbs in the simple tense with a noun object. For example, the wording of Article 2 that \*the delivery of all Equipment shallbe completed by [date" in the form of a prepositional phrase in the passve voice can be paraphrased to explain that \*the Sellr (subject) must (modal) deliver (verb) all Equipment (object) as a contractual obligation in the active voice.

Another key grammatical feature taught to students is the use of modality. The modal shll is customarily used in contracts to impose obligations and prohibit actions, but can also express possibility, prediction, permission and enttlement (Garner, 2011) Students learn to replace shall with more specific modality when giving legal advice, such as the use of must t express the necessity to deliver the equipment in the paraphrase example above. Other common modal verbs include the use of can and may to express possibility and permission.

To test student knowledge f contract terminology, the formative assessment involves a paraphrase short-answer quiz for students to paraphrase and explain the meaning of contractual provisions written in legalese in simple, everyday language (see Week 6). The terminology assessment is also designed to evaluate student knowledge of the operational meaning contractual provisions for both Principal and Agent, which will also be applied in the following oral advice asessment activity as a feature of the scaffolded ELP syllabus. Written feedback is provided to students to assist with the learning process.

# 4.2. Oral advice role play

When the students have adequately understood the genre conventions of the Purchase Agreement, both structurally and seman. tically, they are required to use this knowledge under authentic legal practice conditions for asssment. Lawyers possess both sophisticated oral and writte communication skill in English - skill that are embedded in professional communicationactivities such as giving client advice.Effectie CLIL pedagogy for ESP is therefore not simply a matter of teaching the contents and lexical properties of the contract, but of teaching students how to communicate in a specific discipline (Dalton-Puffer, 2007).

The oral advice role play activity is designed to simulate authentic legal practice whereby students assume a certain type of professional identity to give advice about the operational meaning of the Purchase Contract to a hypothetical client, leading to more successul and meaningful communication in rel life situations (Smit & Dalton-Puffer, 2007). In theoretical terms, this client meeting can also be defined as a type of genre, defied by a series of rhetorical moves, and linguistic features used to achie its communicative goals (Swale, 90). However, the ELP course is not deined to provide explicit instruction about this spoken genre, a it does for the written discourse features of the contract and letter of advice genres. Instead, the instructional activities are designed to teach the communicative purpose of the oral advice meting, its schematic structure, and communication strategies as a type of cognitive road map' (Lee, 2016, p. 100) for students to navigate the oral advice assessment.

For instance, the contextual realities of giving advice to a client face-to-face are first discussed with students to develop ther content knowledge of this important legal practice activity (see Week 6). In relation to language learning, the linguistic process for giving lient avice is textualizd firs as  set of prompts from the cliet about the meaning of etain contractua clauses and then as a series of conversations to model the type f responses expected from the lawyers, which are rehearsed by pairs of students in clas see Weeks 7 & 8). More specifically, the dialogic earning materials are designed to show students how to paraphrase the legalese of the contractual provisions into simplified language that the client can understand, primarily by using the active voice to explain legal obligations and proceses more clearly and coherently with effctive conjunctions. Students are also instructed to replace legalese expressions with plain spoken English alternatives whenever possible.

For the oral adviceassessment (Week 8), students are grouped as lawyers working for the same law firm, and the teacher plays the role of the Sellr client. The decision to engage students in a speaking assessment before a formal writing one is based on the peda gogical premise that concerns about making communicative erors are lessened during the cadence f face-to-face oral conversation, compared to the accurate expectations of writte asessment. These communicative affrdances can help the students develop more confidence in using the target language, immediately afer acquiring the genre-based knowledge of the Purchase Contract.

The decision to group students in pairs is based on the concept of \*collective scaffolding", whereby classmates are encouraged to provide each other with guided support and asstance when preparing for the oral assessment, in ways analogous to teacher scaffold (Parkinson, Jackson, Kirkwood, & Padayachee, 2007, p. 44). It i aso common practice for junior lawyers to collaborate with more senior colleagues when giving client avice, as part of the proces of apprenticeship into the professonal practice roles of law firms. During the role play activity, the instructor (acting as the client) ask students about the operational meaning of pecific contractual provisions. Lawyer-client interactions are often characterised by asymmetrie of legal knowledge and different perceptions of what is relevant to the contractual matter under discussion and students are required to use communicative strategies to explain the technical contractual terms in simpler plain language so that the client can clearly understand. To successully scaffold this discourse activity while at the same time relating it to the previous genre analysis of the Purchase Contract, the teacher should devise questions that require students to apply knowledge acquired from the previous instructional activitie, including those designed to teach students how to paraphrase legalese into everyday language (see Weeks 5 & 7).

In terms of asessed learning outcomes, the cohort of 19students in 2013 achieved the following grades in relation to each of the grading rubric elements in Table 2 (overall grade weighting for each element is indicated in parenthesis).

These formatieassessment findings reveal that most students successull participated in the interactional role behaviors f giving oral client advice. However, the lowest grade average relates to Knowledge $( 5 0 \% )$ and the ability of students to explain the interoperational meaning of the contractual provisions, which is the most demanding discourse requirement. A linear regression anal. ysis was used to examine the correlation between the average grade for the Knowledge element and the combined average grade for the other elements of the grading rubric, using the individual grades for all student $( \Nu = 1 9$ . The correlation was statistically significant: $F$ $( 1 , 3 6 ) = 2 1 . 5 4 , p < 0 . 0 0 1$ For the purposes of action research, the comparatively lower mean grades indicated that most students were not able to fuly explain the operational meaning of certain contractual terms at this stage of the ELP course and seemingly needed more effective instructional activities to prepare for this discourse requirement.

The higher grade averages for the English language $( 3 0 \% )$ element reflected the advanced English proficiency levels for most students, ranging from B2 to C1 CEFR levels. Grades were also awarded for Speaking Delivery $( 1 0 \% )$ and Enthusiasm and Teamwork $( 1 0 \% )$ as key features of the professional rol to give effective client advice in legal ractice. The way the advice i orall delivered can egatively affect th way  is ed y the client, eill if i it sok ooqucky nd t cly. t as ry in itess the enthusiastc ways that students participatd in the rolelay actvities, helping ach ther oive leal advice whennecesary. Some groups of students also took the initiative to flly immerse themeles in the role by dressin in formal busines attire and offering me tea or coffee while engaging in small talk about my hypothetical business operations before the questioning began.

# 4.3. Legal letter of advice

From this stage of the ELP course, the implementation of scaffolded pedagogy focuses on the linguistic features and rhetorical organization of the legal letter of advice genre, using Swalesean move and step analysis (see Swales, 1990, 2004). By introducing new genres while contrastively building on those previously learned, the expectation is that students will understand how contracts are used for different discourse activities in legal practice (Candlin et al., 2002; Jones & Sin, 2004).

# 4.3.1. Legal letter of advice functional organization

The legal ltter of advice is defined as a pivotal gene in the eal profession for the way that it is used y lawyers to inform clients about a legal issue within the cognitive framework of the law (Breze, 2014, p. 284), ofen using the IRAC (Issue, Rule, Analysis, Conclusion) framework embedded in the leter. More specificall, the rhetorical structure of IRAC legal analysis methodology is designed to:

: first identify the legal issue (I);   
: explain the applicable law or rule (R);   
: analytically apply the law to the issue (A); and   
finally reach a conclusion as a form of reasoned legal opinion or advice (C) about the probable outcome of the legal isue or dispute.

In addition to its transactional' function to provide legal advice, Breeze (2014) notes that the letter of advice genre is also "relational, in that it both assumes and projects relationships between the sender and the addressees (p.280). Genre analysi i firt used to teach students the nine moves that are used to achieve a particular discursive function within the ltter (see Weeks 9 & 10). Genre analysis i then used to understand how the leter of advice manages interpersonal relationships between the lawyer and client (see Week 11). This language knowledge relates to the strategic use of lingustic choices within each move and step to construct and maintain relational features that align with the overall communicative purpose of the text. Using this move and step genre analysis, learners are encouraged to theorize about, deconstruct analyse, and ultimately (re)create authentic leters of advice for assessment.

For the ltter asssment task (Week 12), I drafted an email (as a hypothetical client to question the students about the payment terms in Article 4 of the Purchase Contract, which we had covered previously in the terminology and oral advice sections of the ELP syllabus. This type of linguistc scaffolding (Jones & McCracken, 2007; Zwiers, 2006) is designed to progressively develop student knowledge of key contract law concepts embedded in the Purchase Agreement and discursive skils related to providing legal advice about them.

Table 2 Oral advice assessment grading rubric with grade averages.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grading Rubric Element</td><td>Grade Average %</td></tr><tr><td>Knowledge (50): ufficient evidence/explanation is used to support egal advice, including the inter-operational meaning of the contractual provision under discussion with other provisions and relevant legal concepts.</td><td>82.97</td></tr><tr><td>English angage (30) lr and lun entecestructre wth few gramticl eors. ffective use f paraphras simply theexplantionof complex legal terminology. Uses attributive language to contractual provisions under discussion fluently.</td><td>91.42</td></tr><tr><td>Speaking Delivery (10): Uses a clear voice/tone and speaks at a good, measured pace.</td><td>89.63</td></tr><tr><td>Enthusiasm and Teamwork (10): Demonstrates a strong, positive atitude to providing client advice. Provides usefulassistance to lawyer colleague whenever necessary.</td><td>93.84</td></tr></table></body></html>

In terms of the Move and Step structure, a leter drafted by one of the students has been reproduced in Table 3 to demonstrate the goal-orientated linguistic features of nine different moves that were explicitly taught to students (marked terms are underlined in Table 3 for analysis further below). The operational features of the different moves and steps were formulated for this ELP based on my professional experiences drafting letters of adviceas a commercial lawyer and from analysis of authentic example of advice leters sourced for my academic research purposes (see Townley, 2016; Townley, 2019, Townley, 2022).

To develop a robust analytical model of a particular genre it is ofen necessary to recognise certain moves and steps as optional while some can be recycled in differen sentence (Swales 1990). Other moves are always present in this type of ltter genre, such as those embedded in the IRAC framework marked by the heavy $^ +$ symbol in Table 3.

# 4.3.2. Genre move and step analysis

This section explains the functional purpose and linguistic features of each move and step explicitly taught t students from Weeks 8-11 (see Table 1), as exemplified in the student ltter in Table 3. The name of each move is highlighted in italics in parenthesis.

Move 1 (Salutation) and Move 9 (Valediction) represent the most germane discursive features to begin and close the leter as main moves in the leter genre. Move 2 (Orientation) is optional, but often used to achieve the important cohesive function of explaining to the recipient how this particuar leter fit into an overall sequence f comunicative activitie. In this ltter example Move 2 consists f two steps; the first step (S1) reers back to a previous email from the client and the second step (2) includes some explanation forthe reason for writing the letter as part of the intertextual chain of discourse activity.

Move 3 (Statement of Facts) isaso optional, but used in legal practice to provide atransparent record of the facts that relate to the legal dispute. Students are instructed to state the facts as anarrative of what occurred between the parties using the simple past verb tense. From alegal practice perspective, it would be problematic for the lawyer to give leal advice based n incorrect assumptions and students are explictly taught to use the phrase as we understand them from your email" at the beginning of Move 3 to put the onus on the client to correct any misunderstanding about the facts, which functions as a type of disclaimer to protect the lawyer from professional liability.

As noted in Table 3, the IRAC framework is integrated into the etter genre as main moves (47) to provide legal advice. At Move 4 (Legal Isue, the leter of advice beins to integrat the RA framework and students are intructed to first idenify the specific legal issue (the contractual terms of payment) in relation to the relevant contractual provision (Articl 4) based on the preceding statement of facts. Move 5 (Rule) then functions to connect the legal issue with the applicable laws in more detail. In this leter example, the student quotes from the Purchase Contract to be as explicit as possible about the legal process requirements to make the second payment. However, itis also recommended for students to paraphrase the operational meaning of more comple contractual provisions at Move 5to make it easier for the client to understand. In Table 3 we can see that the student has combined the non-payment isue (M4) with explanation of the terms of payment in Article 4 (M5) in the same paragraph, which is not problematic in this example given the relatively simple nature of the dispute. However, it would be advisable to separate Move 4 and Move 5 into different paragraphs when the legal issue and applicable laws are more complex to explain.

At Move 6 (Analysis/Aplication), the student lawyer provides analysis of the legal issue by applying the terms of Article 4 (rule to the factual dispute (issue) to explain that \*the Buyer must give written acceptance before they will pay the second $5 5 \%$ payment". This analytical writing process mainly involves the use of the paraphrasing kills that students have developed during Wees 4 and 5 of the ELP course to explain the legal implications of the contractual rights and obligations in simpler language that clients can understand.

Table 3 Move and step structure of letter of advice genre.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>M#</td><td>Linguistic features of each Move</td></tr><tr><td>+ M1</td><td>Dear Mr. Yilmaz,</td></tr><tr><td>+/- M2</td><td>In response to your email dated October 23, 2013 [S1], please find our legal advice set out in this letter [S2]. According to the  as w unddhe r ormail, yer ad you 45%ft tol mount aer you liverd  nstl thequipment</td></tr><tr><td>+/- M3</td><td>but your riw cce om th  frm r. Th h 55%s t  d e hogh  i no  mns sinceou sent Buyer an invoice for the second payment of 55%.</td></tr><tr><td>+ M4/</td><td>Tis seelaicl th  l thf  [e ic elat th i st tht 55%0f</td></tr><tr><td>M5</td><td>the total oact re sal be de ad yable 45 da fer Byes witnacete ofthqument as ind n th nmeification and Buyer&#x27;s receipt of an invoice itemized to Buyer&#x27;s reasonable satisfaction&quot; [M5] Article ta tht r st gio en teorth ll pa theod% met o this a nt i  you.</td></tr><tr><td>+ M6</td><td>The problem is that this olign i nt cerly rlatd under Aticle4. Instd ther res t actance in Arte  (Warrantes and Article 13(C).</td></tr><tr><td>+ M7</td><td>rite a th i stlan    the hy ii live th it is a breach of contract if they do not pay and you can sue it to get the 55%.</td></tr><tr><td>+/- M8</td><td>We recommend that we set up a meetig with the lawyers for the Buyer to rolve this disute and not go to court. In the meantime, can you send us copies of the invoices you sent the Buyer and any other written communication with the Buyer.</td></tr><tr><td>+ M9</td><td>Best regards,</td></tr></table></body></html>

NB: the student text is produced verbatim.

As part of her analysis, the student also includes intertextual references to ther contractal provisions (Articles 6 & 13) to identif the specific rson for the disute namely that the concept of "cceptance is not regulated properly under the contract Purchase Contract. This student leter is a good example of how the rhetorical elements of the IRAC framework function to organise legal analysis so that the reader can clearly follow legal advice for intrinsically complex issues regulated by law (Townley, 2022).

Based on the legal analysis formulated at Move 6, the student lawer then uses Move 7 (Conclusion) to advise the Seler client that he can sue the Buyer for non-payment because it amounts to a breach of contract. Advising the cient about the predicted legal outcomes involves the use of modality to expres possbilit, permission and entitlement. Move 8 (recommended action) is optional in circumstances where the lawyer does not require anything further from the client and there is no further asstance that the lawyer could realistically provide the client. In this example, the student lawyer was corrct to recommend a meeting with the lawers representing the Buyer to resolve the disute without resorting to any costly litigation. It was also prudent for the student lawyer to ask the client for any documents that relate to the dispute so that the lawyer can best prepare for the meeting.

# 4.3.3. Grading the written assessment and feedback

This section presents the type of written feedack provided to students to sst them with learning development. Discussion of the areas for improvement in the student ltter (see Table 3) also enables me to explain what was taught to students in terms of the functional purpose and linguistic features of the iferent moves of the ltter genre. The grades for each element of the grading rubric (see Appendix A) are recorded in parenthesis.

This student paper was awarded aB" grade overal, which represented the highest grade for this student cohort in 2013. Evaluative feedback from the students indicated that this was the most demanding asessment that required them to apply genre analytical methodology to the writig processfor a specialized legal document they had never written before. Despite these complex cognitive demands, most student achieved either a "C' or "' grade with only two students failing this particular assessment task.

In terms of Content (38/50), the student provided all of the information required for the nine genre moves without including any irrelevant information that had the potential to confuse or mislead the client. However, most of the Content grades are awarded for information embedded in the main moves of the IRAC framework, particularly for the legal analysis (Move 6) and concluding arguments (Move 7), and there were some areas that needed improvement. At Move 6 the contractual regulation of the key concept of \*acceptance" in the Conformed Specifications needed better explanation within the meaning of referential and functional intertextuality (as defined by Devitt, 1991). The student also needed to explain how the regulation of "acceptance' in Article 6 (War. ranites) and Article 13(C) does not affect the Buyer's obligation to pay the remaining $5 5 \%$ of the Price under Article 4. The breach of the payment obligation could also have been explained bette at Move 7 by using diffrent modality to show what is lgall possible and/or expedient in coming to a more conclusive argument that the Seller would be successful in any legal proceedings.

In terms of Functional Organization (18/20), the student lawyer addressed all of the required genre moves in an appropriate register and style for communication with a client. However, some more positive politeness discourse strategies (Brown & Levinson, 1987) could have been used at Move 8 to show greater professional support for the client in resolving the dispute with the use of certain pragmatic choices, such as expressions of encouragement, recognition, and/or goodwill toward the client.

The student could also have improved the use of Cohesive Devices (10/15) to begin certain moves and establish beter coherence throughout the ltter. As highlighted in underline in Table 3, the student did begin Move 3 with the appropriate phrase to disclaim liability for any incorrect facts and to clearly state the issue at Move 4. However, the student could have used the phrase \*Our legal advice is." at Move 6to show more clearly the transition from statement of the relevant ontractual provision at Move 5 to providing legal analysis about i in relation to the isse. The transition from the legal analysi at Move to the conclusion Move 7 could lso have een mproed wt he use of the phase as n our aysi of the l isue, we belie . to str theient more et to the final legal argument. These types of phrases to signal transitions from one move to another were taught to students as key lingustic features of the letter genre (see Weeks 10 and 11 in Table 1).

In terms of Language (16/20), the student was able to paraphrase contractual terms into simpler language and communicate effectively with the client in a professional tone. Furthermore, the use of plural pronouns to represent the entire law firm in the letter lends institutional authority and credibility to her advice, such as "our advice" and \*we recommend'. However, there were some grammaticalerrors made throughout the letter and the student could have used more interactional meta-discourse, such as boosters (clearly, and obviously) attitude markers (interested and confident, and engagement markers (We loo forward to hearing from you"), which are recognized by other researchers (Brown & Levinson, 1987; Hyland, 2005; Planken, 2005) as an important means of facilitating communication, supporting a writer's position and building a positive relationship with an audience see Week 11 in Table 1).

# 5. Ongoing action research

An important part of this action research project was to monitor and evaluate the efects of the changes made to the ELP course in 2013 with a view to continuing to improve the sylabus over the next four years while I continued in this teaching role until 2017. For example, I used student asessment resuls with concomitant written feedback and student evaluations of the ELP course as research data to determine what further pedagogical changes needed to be made to improve teaching and learning practices. This type of cyclical relection help instructors to continually make sense of the processes, problems, isues and constraints of action reearch and the circumstances in which they occur (Kemmis & McTaggart, 1988).

Giving feedback when grading assessment is an important type of data used in the action research processfor both students and instructors. In the first instance, the fedack data provides students with credible and substantial evidence o understand the contract and advice letter genres better and to help them improve their legal communication skill. In order for feedback to reach its ul potential, Siour (2015) argues that it nees to euilt into the structure of syllabus and be detaled, frequent and timely (p.85). In Table 1 we can se that the ELP course ofers students multiple opportunities to receive written feedback on their knowledge of the Purchase Agreement (Week 6) and their ELP speaking (Week 9) and writing abilities (Week 12). Oral feedback was also provided during the in-class practice session for the oral assessment in Week 8.

In terms of improvement, it also became evident that providing more detailed corrective advice for the paraphrasing activities in Weeks 5 and 6 heled students prioritie and improve this writing skil set for giving more effective advicet clients. In subsequent ELP courses, feedback was provided earlier on to improve the knowledge and communication ability of students to paraphrase legalese into plain simpler English for the oral and written asessment tass in Weeks 8 and 12 respectively It was observed that this type of feedback before assessment could motivat students to perform beter, by giving them learning support and cognitive strategies s well as corrective advice (Hattie & Timperley, 2007).

Written feedback also enables instructors to collect information that they can use to improve pedagogy through a reiterative and self-refective spirl lop of professional development. More specificall, it helped me plan for more efective instructional ctivities and materials for students to paraphrase legalese into plain simpler English and to use the discursive features recognized for the different moves and steps of the leter gere. In resonse to this critical refectio, used actio reeach to delop more decriptive and explanatory pedagogical materials with example that students could study at home in preparation for the next lesson, such as for the lexico-grammatical properties and patterns of the contractual provisions in Week 4 (see Table 1). For this ELP course in 2013, most of the teaching and leaning processes were restrcted to class time and I put more demands on students todo homework in future ELP courses to maximise the time allocated for learning and assessment in 12 weeks.

I also used student evaluation surveys at the completion of the ELP course to assess itsefectivenes. Almost al of the students valued the practical nature of the sylabus to participate in professional discourse activitie that were relevant to their future professional lives. Most students also commented on feelings of accomplishment and confidence by being able to understand the functional organization and lexical properties of the commercial contract in a systematic way and the discourse ability to construct a coherent and effective letter of advice.

The relatively high English proficiency levels of students enrolled in the ELP program (CEFR B2 to C1) meant that most of them were able to participate efectively in the learning and assessment activitie. Nevertheless some students said that they found it difficult to understand the genre analytical methodologies used for teaching the structure, style, and content of the ltter of advice (Swales, 1990), which was also evidenced in the lower grades rcorded for the leter assessment, in comparison to the oral assssment. In response to critical reflction about these learning needs, a proces of planned intervention involved alocating more time to understanding the lexico-grammatical features and functional meaning of key phrases used to achieve specific communicative goals in each move and step of the letter genre during Weeks 9-11 by reducing the class ime previously allocated to contextual discussion of the discursive roles and practices of commercial lawyers in Week 1 (see Table 1). Students who struggled with the discursive requirements of the terminology asessment in Week 6 and/or the oral assessment in Week 8, perhaps due to lower English proficiency levels, could also benefit during this stage of the ELP course from further diffrentiated language instruction about the use of active voice sentence structures (subject $^ +$ [modal] verb $^ +$ object) to paraphrase contractual provisions and give more effective legal advice at Moves 5 and 6 of the letter genre for the written assessment in Week 12.

# 6. Conclusion

When reflecting on the leaning outcomes recorded inaessment results and student evaluations, ths action research project was successful in achieving its main goals to make changes to an existing ELP course and implement a sylabus that more effctively met the communication nees of the undergraduate law students. In terms of syllabus design, I was able to integrat CLIL and gnre analytical methodologies to scaffold the teaching and learning of both content knowledge and English language skill for iving both oral and written client advice about the operational meaning of a commercial contract.

While the ELP course is very imited in scope when we consider the diverse range of specialized genres used in legal practice this type of practical ELP training can help prepare law student for the exigencies of ineracting with clients to give legal advice. It i also possible for students to apply this knowledge of genre analytical methodology to understand other legal documents for other legal discourse activities in both English and Turkish during their undergraduate studies, which may give them a competitive advantage when interviewing for employment in law firms. And while this action research study was undertaken in the specific context of a private universty in Istanbul, the same action research methods and syllabus design can be used to educate lawyers from in increasing range of non-English speaking backgrounds and contexts, many of whom study law in English as the medium of istruction (EMI) and increasingly need to practice law in English as the primary lingua franca for international business law purposes (see Breeze, 2014).

The positive impact of the scaffolded ELP pedagogy on the acquistion of English language kills for legal purposes in the non-native speaking context of this action research study can be just as appropriate for teaching the discursive practices of lawyers to native speakers. Based on my own experience of receiving no formal training in legal communication as a law student and practicing lawyer in Austrlia, there is no doubt that native English speakers also experience speial linguistic and conceptual dffclties when aquiring the terminology and discursive practices of a discipline like law. And not limited to client advice discourse activities, the same scaffolde, genre-based analytical approach to ELP syllabus design can also be used to teach and learn other interactional communicative processes for other legal discourse purposes as well.

This action research study may also contribute to the profesional development of language tachers, who are required to teach ESP courses without any previous experience in legal practice. Many of these instructors may have to rely on textbooks materials for the relevant ESP learning context, which have not evolved to meet the specific discourse needs of students. Similar to my own experiences when I was appointed to teach ELP syllabus that was not relevant for the learners, i is important for language teachers to be more aware of the specific learner needs and social contingencies of the action research context and to design a syllabus that integrates linguistic-based analysis of target discourse practices.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Anthony Townley: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Resources, Project administration, Methodology, Invetigation, Formal analysis, Data curation, Conceptualization.

Appendix A. Letter of advice assessment grading rubric   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Grading Rubric Descriptive Element</td><td></td><td>B</td><td>c</td><td>D</td><td></td><td>F</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>90-100</td><td></td><td>80-90</td><td>70-80</td><td>60-70</td><td>60 &lt;</td></tr><tr><td>Content (50%) The contents of the letter directly respond to the client request in relation to the correct legal issue. Each</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>move of the letter is discussed in sufficient detail. This also means that no unnecessary or irrelevant information has been included that has the potential to confuse the client or take attention away from the correct legal advice.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Functional Organization (20%) The letter of advice has been structured in accordance with the moves and steps commonly used for this genre: Opening + Orientation + Facts + Issue + Rule + Analysis + Conclusion + Action + Closing with</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>appropriate language used to maintain relational features that align with the different communicative purposes of the text.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cohesive Devices (10%) Signal phrases to begin moves and other effective discourse markers/conjunctions have been used to</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>improve coherence and cohesion throughout the letter.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Language (20%)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The written language has the formal tone and quality common to this legal letter of advice genre without</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>being too legalese&#x27; or diicult for the client to understand. There are no consistent lexico-grammatical errors that obscure meaning.e</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Airey, . (2016.P, or  n lad  h ., h R hdok of ish fo dc p .7183).A ted.   
Bak T., ry,  (200. oig n aproch hi lrse  nt f prctice ot. l f thei  ecs Association, 197-202.   
as, 01 Purposes, 50, 1-13.   
as, , 0    e .) T f linguistics (pp. 176-187). Advance Online Publication.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1993). Analysing genre: Language use in professional settings. Longman.   
Bhatia, V. K. (1994). Cognitive sructuring in legislative provisions. In J. Gibbons (Ed.), Language and the law (pp. 136-155. Longman.   
at00  c t  . i si discourse (pp. 39-60). Hong Kong: City University of Hong Kong Press.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2004). Worlds of written discourse: A genre-based view. Continuum.   
Bhatia, V. K. (2008). Genre analysis, ESP and professional practice. English for Specific Purposes, 27, 161-174.   
Breze 01ieif  tthe f    a.) Interpersonality in legal genres (pp. 280-302). Bern: Peter Lang.   
Brown, P., & Levinson, S. (1987). Politeness: Some universals in language usage. Cambridge University Press.   
amps, 1 s inis o l  mr  is  i no  Line Lopez, & R. Crespo Jimenez (Eds.), Professional English in the European context: The EHEA challenge (pp. 175-194). Peter Lang.   
nd .. (98  .  . -22.  oa.   
Cand     002n   mril r h  r P ati Specific Purposes, 21, 299-320.   
Candlin, C. N., & Crichton, J. (2011). Discourses of deficit. Palgrave Macmillan.   
Choi, A., & Triantis, G. (2012). The efect of bargaining power on contract design. Virginia Law Review, 98(8), 1665-1743.   
Cogo, A & Jens, . 2010). ish a aia  oe  mht olicy ad ti   f L ic, 2, 271-294.   
Coulthard, M., & Johnson, A. (2010). The Routledge handbook of forensic linguistics. Routledge.   
Coyle, D., Hood, P., & Marsh, D. (2010). Clil: Content and language integrated learning. Cambridge University Press.   
Crookes, G. (1993). Action research for second language teachers: Going beyond teacher research. Applied Lingusics, 14(2), 130-144.   
Dalton-Puffer, C. (2007). Discourse in content and language integrated learning (CLIL) classrooms. John Benjamins.   
Darvin, R., Lo, Y., & Lin, A. M. (2020). Examining CLIL through a critical lens. English Teaching & Learning, 44, 103-108. Learning and Teaching, 6(3), 455-486. and con- temporary studies of writing in professional communities (pp. 336-357). University of Wisconsin Press.   
Fowerd  013.  ai d  in . .  . .,  ok  Esh fo i  p 325-346). Wiley.   
Garner, B. A. (2011). Garner's dictionary of legal usage. Oxford University Press.   
Gibb, . ey,  n n  m , J- ,  l. 016)  t uf i   g education. Educational Action Research, 1-20.   
Gilabert  (205. ing the us of mile  nd m ns ais c tdy of jss  the s cont f an (Spain). In M. H. Long (Ed.), Second language needs analysis (pp. 182-199). Cambridge University Press.   
Hartig, A. J., & Lu,  (2014). Plain English and lgal writing: Comparing expert and novice writer. nglishfor Spcic Purposes, 33, 87-96.   
Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The power of feedback. Review of Educational Research, 77(1), 81-112.   
Hyland, K. (2005). Metadiscourse: Exploring interaction in writing. Continuum.   
Jensen, A. (2009). Discourse strategies in professonal e-mail negotiation: A case study. English for Specific Purposes, 28(1), 418. & V. Zegers (Eds.), Researching content and language integration in higher education (pp. 122-136). Maastricht University.   
Jones,  rcke. 011. sin th  t ed  The ativ istiof psin n a ae classroom. In C. Candin & S. Sarangi (Eds.), Handbook of comunication i organisations and professions (p. 499-518).Mouton de Gruter.   
one    00h t   h f     Adsic 1, 95-10. https://doi.org/10.1558/jal.v1i1.95   
Kemmis, S., & McTaggart, R. (1988). The action research planner. Deakin University Press.   
Klimova, B. (2012). CLIL and the teaching of foreign languages. Procedia - Social and Behavioral Sciences, 47, 572-576.   
Lasaster018.   hi t  51,00416.   
Lee, J J. (206.Tes inionalit in  .: A e anals of AP clrm esos. Jo f gish for dc Pe, 23, 9112.   
acaro,   (017ks t  t t   t   g r at e as variables. Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, 39(3), 256-270.   
Pald  20  r     t . k  or   4-. y Blackwell.   
rko  J e 0    .  r Purposes, 26(4), 443-461.   
Piner, R. (2013).thticity and CLL: g tticit from an inational CLL petive. tional CL h Jodl, 21) 4454.   
lnken 0  r i l  h  e 24 381-400.   
n 0   .  4 100826.   
e D.      i Academic Purposes, 7(3), 165-179.   
eiour, n c    s  e, 18, 84 89.   
Smit, U., & Dalton-Puffer, C. (2007). Current research on CLIL. Special issue of VIEws (viena English working papers)(Vol. 16), 3.   
Swales, J. M. (1990). Genre analysis: English in academic and research settings. Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge University Press.   
Tiersma, P. M. (1999). Legal language. University of Chicago Press.   
Tnl, 016) f s  og  nng   e.sh r . P 4 881   
Tonl, 01t     ti Communication, 13(2), 228-248.   
Toly,1)   i. 30   
ole22  ithf i a si   c i e study from Europe. International Journal of Legal Discourse, 7(1), 1-31.   
Wenger, E. (1998). Communities of practice: Learning, meaning, and identity. Cambridge University Press.   
Wenger, E., McDermott, R. A., & Snyder, W. (2002). Culivating communities of practice. Harvard Business School Press.   
Williams, C. (2004). Legal English and plain language: An introduction. ESP Across Cultures, 1, 111-124.   
Wood, D., Bruner, J., & Ros, G. (1976). The role of tutoring in problem solving. Jounal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17, 89-100.   
wiers, J. (006). nin dmi g, thnkin, an ont g scfos fr nn-tie aer in th md gra. Jl f gis for Academic Purposes, 5(4), 317-332.