# Questions of time and communication: A writing program administrator’s experiences with labor-based grading

Todd Ruecker

Colorado State University, USA

Although Crusan covered a variety of ungrading approaches, I want to focus my response on labor- or contract- based grading (Inoue, 2019), which involve establishing a grading agreement with a student that values the effort they put in to meeting assignment goals rather than attending to particular and problematic language standards. Although I have only used this once in my own class, I am also familiar with student experiences in my work as a writing program administrator (WPA) as instructors have regularly used them in programs I have directed. For reasons detailed below, I have not systematically implemented this approach program-wide, but have welcomed professional development around the topic and encouraged experienced instructors to experiment with it.

As a WPA, one of the first questions that arises is how students will react to a new approach to something as central to a course as grading—if a number of students go complaining to an administrator’s office, we’ll need to be ready to defend our approach. At my previous institution, we conducted a survey of developmental writing students in an accelerated writing course that included both L1 and L2 writers as part of our assessment of a new curriculum. While contract grading was not the primary focus of the survey, one question asked student attitudes towards the following statement: “I am satisfied with the contract/labor-based grading approach used by my instructor.” Student response was largely favorable, with $6 7 \ \%$ (98/146) indicating “strongly agree” and $2 3 \ \%$ (34/146) “somewhat agree.” The most popular theme in open-ended responses was that it focused on valuing the work they put in—this was followed by the feeling that it was less stressful, and alongside that, easier to get a good grade. However, not all students were supportive—as one student succinctly wrote, “I hated the contract grading.” Skepticism of the practice generally stemmed from not knowing where they stood in the course at a particular point in the semester. Knowing that grades would ultimately be assigned and count for a variety of things like scholarships, students struggled to let them go. Nonetheless, we found that most students we surveyed embraced the practice. That said, as noted elsewhere (Ruecker & Shapiro, 2020), I have a healthy skepticism of quickly embraced new approaches, and generally discourage first year graduate instructors from using contract grading.

Two points brought up by Crusan via Rosenfeld (2023) particularly shape this attitude around contract grading: time commitment and communication. In learned about the time commitment involved when I used contract grading in teaching one section of the above-mentioned accelerated writing course capped at 15 students. I had to provide extensive feedback to convey expectations, and half or more of students typically had to revise their major projects to meet the expectations, some more than once. I did value the back and forth with students and felt that this approach really freed me to engage meaningfully with their writing and push them to grow. However, as a WPA, I am conscious of instructor workload and class sizes in writing classes (cf., Ruecker & Gorelangton, 2024), and that we cannot always expect overworked writing instructors to engage in what the field deems a “best practice”—I couldn’t have imagined doing this approach with 100 students. So yes, while ungrading approaches may be more productive ways to engage with students, and the relationship building mentioned by Blum (2020a) is valuable, sometimes overworked instructors need the efficiency provided by traditional grading rubrics, which, as Crusan and Ruecker (2022) have argued elsewhere, are a positive way to be transparent with students and support their learning.

Another issue that resonates highly with me are communication challenges in a contract model. In the survey results referenced earlier, a number of students raised concerns about knowing where they stood in the course, such as this one: “I like knowing what my grade is during the whole course, not updates every now and then.” Students have grown up in a system that focuses on grades and grading, so moving to an approach where grades aren’t regularly assigned can be disorienting and upsetting. For this reason, I generally advise writing teachers whom I train to not engage with contract-grading approaches in their first year, as handling student frustrations in experiencing a new grading process adds an additional challenge as they learn other aspects of teaching.

On another note, students are still assigned final grades in the various ungrading approaches because the institutions still require them—so it makes sense they will want to know their standing throughout the semester. This balance between classroom practices and broader institutional expectations reminds me of some of the debates around translingualism—as I’ve written elsewhere, we can disrupt the norms within our classes, but then other readers of students’ writing will read them with expectations of privileged varieties of English and may grade them more harshly or deny them a job. Not that I’m advocating against the use of either in any classroom, but while breaking down norms, we also need to make students aware that many others still practice oppressive approaches and will treat their writing very differently.

Before ending, I wanted to touch on Carillo’s (2021) work referenced by Crusan. Carillo (2021) makes the case that labor-based grading often risks substituting one problematic standard for another—for instance, she notes that not every student can put in the same amount of labor into an assignment, as some have jobs or family commitments or disabilities. With ungrading, as with other popular pedagogical approaches that we have seen proposed over the years, it is important to know that a particular approach may work well in certain classes and contexts but not others—there is no one “best practice.” Based on faculty and student dispositions, workloads and class sizes, and broader institutional demands, one needs to make the choices that work best in their context.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Todd Ruecker: Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

# Data Availability

Data will be made available on request.

# References

Blum, S. D. (2020a). Not simple but essential. In S. D. Blum (Ed.), Ungrading: Why rating students undermines learning (and what to do instead) (pp. 219–228). West Virginia University Press.   
Carillo, E. C. (2021). The hidden inequities in labor-based contract grading. University Press of Colorado.   
Crusan, D., & Ruecker, T. (2022). Linking assignments to assessments: A guide for teachers. University of Michigan Press.   
Inoue, A. B. (2019). Labor-based grading contracts: Building equity and inclusion in the compassionate writing classroom. Fort Collins, CO: WAC Clearinghouse.   
Rosenfeld, H. (2023). Ungrading for cartographic education: Reflections from small undergraduate classes. Cartographic Perspectives, 101, 56–62.   
Ruecker, T., & Shapiro, S. (2020). Seeking a middle ground: Resisting absolutism in conversations about linguistic diversity. In T. Silva, & Z. Wang (Eds.), Reconciling translingualism and second language writing (pp. 139–149). Routledge.   
Ruecker, T. & Gorelangton, G. (2024). Building effective arguments about writing class size and workload. WPA Journal. Forthcoming in Fall 2024.