# BALEAP News – April 2022

On April 2, 2002, we combined BALEAP's 50th, JEAP's 20th and the 2022 AGM into one big celebratory event at Manchester University. Like many, I congratulated BALEAP on its first 50 years - the stories and reflections from many previous Chairs – Philip Shaw, Maggie Ward-Goodbody, Jeanne Godfrey, Andy Gillet, Joan Turner, Michael Hughes, Olwyn Alexander, Diane Schmitt and Maxine Gillway – were inspiring, but it also made me realise that I have big shoes to fill! What I also took away was how far we've come as a profession and the huge possibilities that we have as an organisation. Significant congratulations as well to JEAP – the rigorous academic foundation from this journal underpins much of what we do, and it was a pleasure to link both anniversaries.

We also heard updates on the new BALEAP Accreditation Scheme (BAS), the newly streamlined TEAP criteria, and developments in Research and Publications. This was followed by a series of lightning talks on what EAP might look like in the future. All these talks can be viewed on the BALEAP website.

The new BALEAP Accreditation Scheme will become fully operational this year under the watchful eye and enthusiastic approach of Lia Blaj-Ward. I'm happy to say that two universities have already been assessed using the new criteria, with very positive feedback. Three core principles have been identified as key to the new scheme, namely, Contextualisation, Constructive Alignment and Collabo ration and the original vision of these principles running through the new criteria like a ‘golden thread’ is working well. I should also note that the new scheme has been streamlined into two categories, namely i) Leadership and Administration and ii) Programme: Content, Delivery, and Assessment each with ten criteria. This focus again proving noticeably popular with those who have engaged with the revised scheme to date.

Training has taken place for current BAS assessors and a call has gone out on the BALEAP mailing list for new assessors to help the scheme grow. There will also be the free annual BAS event that takes place on the 7 May at the University of Bristol and the theme for this is: Serendipity and/or structure? Building sustainable collaborations.

The TEAP scheme has newly redesigned criteria and there is now a new TEAP handbook, with revisions to the scheme more closely reflecting BALEAP's values of Collaboration, Development, Inclusivity and Professionalism. The TEAP scheme is now more aligned with other professional accreditation schemes (such as HEA) while retaining distinctive ‘EAP’ features. Very usefully the scheme has started a bank of online recordings of EAP observations intended to be available to BALEAP institutions for institutional tutor development programmes.

Research and Publications highlighted the Social Justice theme funding winners, and the topics (https://www.baleap.org/news/ social-justice-in-eap-practice-funding-award-winners) were clearly relevant to current issues in EAP. I'd also like to add my congratulations to Rob Lowton for his success in the 2022 MA Dissertation Award.

The SIG's also had a very fruitful session and it was a great opportunity to informally meet the teams behind their stellar work. This is an ongoing area of growth for BALEAP and the energy from each of these groups is clear. We all look forward to hearing more from them in the future and with this in mind, I'll be asking the SIGs to share some of their news in upcoming versions of BALEAP news.

Last and by no means least we gave our thanks to Bella Reichard, who acted as Ordinary Member, Web Officer and Treasurer and of course to Sarah Brewer who has been BALEAP's Chair for the last four years. Both will be sorely missed, and we thank them for their unfailing commitment and contribution to the organisation. I really must highlight Sarah's leadership and support as Chair in what has been an extremely difficult period - she expertly navigated us through the never-ending unpredictability of the pandemic and her work and decisions in the depths of Covid are something for which we should all be thankful for.

So, as I start my term, I look forward to working with colleagues to build on the foundations of all those who have gone before.

Equally importantly, I look forward to working with current BALEAP colleagues to make sure BALEAP is what you want and hope for from your organisation, and to make sure that those who follow celebrate our 100th anniversary from a position of strength.