# Examining the test-taking process: a cognitive perspective on the discourse cloze test Peter Storey Language Testing 1997 14: 214 DOI: 10.1177/026553229701400205

The online version of this article can be found at: http://Itj.sagepub.com/content/14/2/214

# Additional services and information for Language Testing can be found at:

Email Alerts: http://Itj.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts

Subscriptions: http://Itj.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http:/Itj.sagepub.com/content/14/2/214.refs.html >> Version of Record - Jul 1, 1997 What is This?

# Examining the test-taking process: a cognitive perspective on the discourse cloze test

Peter Storey Hong Kong Institute of Education

Testing consists of making a generalization about a population on the basis of what can be observed in a sample. This principle underlies not only the composition of the sample of individuals to be tested but also the selection of content for the testing instrument itself. Careful attention to the content of assessment tasks is needed to ensure that they are representative of the domain of tasks about which generalizations are to be drawn. However, content representativeness extends beyond mere attention to the problems posed and materials provided in the test. What is more crucially important is the manner in which test tasks are performed. Attention to test-taking process is especially crucial and problematic in the testing of cognitive processing skills. The sample will only be representative if the cognitive processes involved in task performance are representative of those involved in performance of the domain of tasks in the real world. Thus the validation of tests involving cognitive processes will not be complete unless it includes some examination of the processes by which solutions to test tasks are reached. This line of thinking was propounded 40 years ago by Lennon but has only recently been taken up with the application of ethnographic methods to the study of the test-taking process.

This article looks at the findings of a study of the processes employed by subjects engaged in a discourse cloze test. Think-aloud protocols obtained from testtakers give indications of the reasoning employed in selecting items to complete gaps in the cloze passage and of the strategies employed in doing so. From these indications, cognitive processes are inferred. Comparing observed behaviours and inferred processes with those predicted in a model of ideal performance gives a measure of the construct validity both of the items and of the discourse cloze procedure in general. This introspective validation procedure reveals the test-taking behaviour of subjects engaged in cloze tasks and provides a cognitive perspective on the vexed question of what cloze actually measures.

# 1 Introduction

Cloze tests have been the subject of intense debate over the past 25 years. On the one side are the advocates of cloze who see the cloze task as involving the discourse processing ability which can provide a measure of language proficiency (Oller and Conrad, 1971; Oller, 1973; Chihara et al., 1977; Chavez-Oller et al., 1985; Jonz, 1990; Fotos, 1991). On the other are those who see cloze as only measuring the ability to make localized connections in the text (Alderson, 1978;

1979; 1983; Porter, 1983; Bachman, 1982; 1985). McKenna and Layton (1990) point out that concurrent validation of cloze tasks has consistently shown a positive relationship between cloze and global comprehension measures. The fact that cloze itself may not require intersentential comprehension does not preclude a high correlation with measures that do. Despite the apparent polarity of viewpoints in this context debate, the issue is really only a question of differential emphasis since findings on both sides do not conclusively counter arguments on the other. Those who argue that cloze is 'sensitive to discourse constraints' are clearly correct in their analysis of the amount of context required to restore selected blanks. Those who argue that cloze is largely, or on average, a sentence- or clause-level task are also correct since under random deletion methods even proponents of cloze have found that a majority of deletions can be restored by reference to extratextual information or local context, and not to discourse-level constraints.

One perspective which has been somewhat neglected in this debate is that of the test-taker. The idiosyncratic nature of human behaviour means that the amount of context actually utilized in completing a gap may be quite independent of what analysis might indicate is the amount required to complete it. Thus a cloze item might appear to require intersentential reference to complete it, but a subject may in fact use a quite different strategy to close the gap, one which is based on other clues in the immediate context of the gap, on prior, general knowledge or on a whole range of other test-taking strategies or behaviours (Storey, 1994a; 1995). Moreover, the nature of intersentential reference is seen, in this study, to differ qualitatively from subject to subject. Restoring a cloze item based on a cohesive tie such as that established by lexical substitution (Halliday and Hasan, 1976), for example, might in fact not involve the recognition of cohesion at all, but be based instead on a low-level matching of shared semantic features.

# II Alternatives to the classical model

The context debate concerned itself with the classical, random deletion cloze test. A number of writers including Porter (1978), Klein-Braley (1983) and Bachman (1982; 1985) had already concluded that the classical model was not what it had been thought to be an easily constructed, consistently reliable measure of proficiency -- and had begun to suggest modifications. What was needed was a professionally developed test in which items would be fine-tuned to ensure that they involved higher-order processing. Tailored cloze (Fotos, 1991; Brown, 1988; i993) was one way of improving the random model by investing time and resources in test development through piloting, item analysis and selection techniques. At the same time there was increasing support for sacrificing the random redundancy felt to be necessary for the measurement of proficiency through the classical cloze procedure in favour of the use of rational deletion to measure, not general proficiency, but discourse processing with specific reference to reading ability (Deyes, 1984; Levenston, Nir and Blum-Kulka, 1984; Markham, 1987; 1988; Bensoussan, 1990). Others advocated the use of multiple-choice options as a way of enhancing various aspects of cloze procedure: in order to provide a purer, nonproductive test of the receptive skill of reading (Porter, 1975), to test more efficiently (Jonz, 1976), to design cloze tests to meet specific needs (Bensoussan and Ramraz, 1984) and to reduce testing and scoring time (Mauranen, 1988; 1989).

Mauranen (1988) analysed items in a random-deletion cloze test in a manner similar to that used by Bachman (1985) and Jonz (1990). She found that the amount of context required to complete a blank -- its 'range' - was a significant factor in the difficulty of the item. Items with a range above the sentence level were significantly more difficult than clause or sentence items. The development of the Semantic Cloze which resulted from these findings was accompanied by strict guidelines for the construction of similar tests: the use of items that function at least at sentence level and above it where possible; the selection of items which require the recognition of cohesive relations and textual patterning; the use of distracters which conform to the range level of the deletion and the difficulty level of the text; and the avoidance of fine semantic distinctions (Mauranen, 1988: 340-41).

Levenston, Nir and Blum-Kulka (1984) advocated the use of rational deletion to narrow down the scope of the assessment and discriminate better between good and poor readers. Their proposals were made in response to problems identified in process-orientated research into test-taking strategies which had shown that poor readers utilize only the local context in restoring deletions, whereas good readers are able to utilize both local context and macro-level information (see also Cohen, 1984). Levenston, Nir and Blum-Kulka suggest that only items marking relationships between propositions, specifically markers of coreference and connectives between propositions, should be selected for deletion in order to maximize the test's ability to identify good readers.

Pollitt and Hutchinson (1987) introduced a variation on the rational deletion cloze involving the use of paraphrase. Candidates would read a text and then be presented with a gapped passage summarizing the original text. This 'summary completion' or 'summary cloze' was introduced in the revised version of the Hong Kong Examination Authority's Use of English (UE) test in 1989 - UE is a test administered to Form 6 secondary-school students and widely used as a qualifying exam for entry to tertiary education in Hong Kong. Coniam (1993) analysed the summary cloze test used in the 1989 UE paper and found serious problems with it. Items lacked text-dependency, and little evidence could be found to show that the summary skills the test was designed to measure could in fact be measured by such a test.

In this study, a multiple-choice discourse cloze test was developed, modelled on the SeDelGap test of Bensoussan and Mauranen (1989), the Discourse Cloze test of Deyes and Levenston, Nir and BlumKulka (both 1984), the Semantic Cloze of Mauranen (1988) and the Summary Completion test of Pollitt and Hutchinson (1987).

# III Method

A 13-item, multiple-choice, rational-deletion discourse cloze test was constructed (see the appendix). The test was one of a battery of diagnostic reading tests developed in a comparative study of construct validation techniques (Storey, 1994b). The test battery was intended to identify those students entering a course of study in education who were in need of presessional work in reading. A survey of lecturing staff identified the reading requirements of the course to be the ability to recognize and understand main ideas in selected extracts from educational textbooks. A review of the literature identified a model of main idea recognition and comprehension largely based on the work of Kintsch and van Dijk (1978; van Dijk and Kintsch, 1983) which formed the basis of the test specification. The educational textbooks actually used on the course were sampled and extracts analysed along lines suggested by Sarig (1989). The Sarig procedure involves obtaining a consensus opinion as to what are the main ideas and underlying structure of the texts to be used in a test. Four texts were used in the study. A panel of readers was presented with the texts and asked to identify the main ideas and construct a summary statement for each text. Consensus main idea statements were obtained by collating the results of this survey. These statements were then used as the basis for the construction of mini-texts which presented the main ideas of the original text in paraphrase form. One of these mini-texts formed the basis of a discourse cloze test.

The discourse cloze test in the study was designed to generate the discourse processing strategies identified in the model of the reading process underlying the test specification. The van Dijk and Kintsch model emphasizes the role of argument repetition in the reader's development of a macroproposition for the text. Cohesive devices and rhetorical markers have a key role in establishing relationships between text propositions, and it is through these inter-relationships that argument repetition is realized. In the test, therefore, items were deleted on the basis of their role in marking relationships between propositions. In order to ensure that intersentential comprehension was measured, the range of the items - the amount of context which it was predicted that candidates would need to take into account in order to restore the deletion -- was a key consideration. Suitable items for deletion would therefore be discourse markers, anaphoric pronouns and lexical substitutes acting cohesively. The use of discourse cloze techniques with a summary paragraph carries the underlying assumption that it is possible to assess, through paraphrase recognition, a discourse processing element of comprehension involving an understanding of text structure, its role in holding the main ideas together in a coherent framework, and the role of rhetorical devices in marking that structure. The fact that mostly functional items were deleted served to ensure that the summary paragraph was text-dependent in that a memory or understanding of the propositional content of the original text was necessary in order to make the connections between the paraphrased propositions in the summary passage. Students had access to the original text in completing the task, and thus could attempt to trace the origin of the paraphrase in the original text as they worked through the items.

The text upon which the discourse cloze was based was an extract from an educational textbook (Fontana, 1988) and had a Cause-- Consequence structure with an implied solution to the problem whose cause is expounded upon. The problem is the misbehaviour of pupils in class; the implied solution is greater awareness of the cause of the problem which is elaborated with examples of its consequences. This structure is represented in the summary paragraph in paraphrase form. It was hypothesized that recognition of the structure of the summary paragraph would provide a measure of candidates' ability to recognize the structure of the original text. A further hypothesis was that candidates' ability to recognize the propositional content of the main ideas of the original text and select items which will hold the paraphrased ideas together in a coherent summary reflects and represents their ability to use a structure strategy in processing discourse generally. For discussion of these hypotheses, see Storey (1994b).

The 619 words of the original text were summarized and paraphrased in a paragraph of 265 words and 12 sentences. The paragraph was written to incorporate a number of discourse markers and cohesive devices. These items were deleted from the text and arranged with three distracters for candidates to select from. Thirteen deletions were made falling into four categories: discourse markers (items 1, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12), anaphoric pronouns or NPs (2), lexical substitutes (3, 4, 5, 11, 13) and lexical items (6). The lexical item also contributes to cohesion in the text since it is collocationally linked to a preceding noun -- Reinforcement -- which is a key lexical item in both the original text and the summary paragraph. Items were selected not only for their function but also for their range, that is the amount of text which has to be processed in order to locate disambiguating information such as antecedents, or information to elucidate the role of logical or rhetorical markers.

# IV Subjects

Twenty-five female first-year Hong Kong Chinese students enrolled in a two-year teacher education course in the Hong Kong Institute of Education undertook the introspective study. The study was carried out in the first semester of the course to ensure that subjects would be as representative as possible of new entrants to the institute. In order to ensure that high-quality protocols could be obtained in English, subjects were selected on the basis of their English oral proficiency as measured by an oral interview used in the admission procedure, and all subjects were English majors.

The subjects sat the test in a language laboratory. They had all undergone training in a think-aloud method involving concurrent introspection followed by immediate retrospection in the natural pauses in the test-taking process. Prior to tackling the discourse cloze test, the students had answered a number of comprehension questions on the original text.

# V Findings

The findings in the study consist of the behaviour patterns identified in the think-aloud data generated by the test items. They will be discussed in relation to two categories of cloze deletion: discourse markers and cohesive devices.

# 1 Discourse markers

a Ideal performance:Introspective validationproceeds by assessing observed behaviour against a predicted model of ideal performance which is in turn based on a model of the reading process. The nature of the ideal model of performance varies with the nature of the item and its relation to the original text. Items 1, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 12 consist of deleted discourse markers. Table 1 indicates the range of each of these items, and how they relate to the original text.

One of the deleted discourse markers is designated as \*macro' in range. This means that restoration of the deletion requires reference to material outside the sentence providing the immediate context for the item. However, the other five deleted discourse markers, although they have a micro range within the summary paragraph, also require reference to material outside their immediate sentential context to make their meaning clear to test-takers. The passage which forms the basis of the text is a summary-paraphrase of the original text and, though the passage is self-contained, subjects tackle the cloze test after they have completed comprehension questions on the original text. Subjects are expected to acquire a knowledge of the propositional content of the original text through tackling these questions and to make reference to that knowledge, or indeed to the original text itself, in tackling the cloze task. For this reason, these items are designated as 'micro $+ '$ . In order for subjects to select the correct option they would need to refer either to their personal macroproposition for the original text, or directly to that text.

Each of the discourse marker items except one, in the context of the summary passage, consists of a paraphrase of the original text. Only item 1 constitutes an implication which remains unstated in the original text, but was identified in the consensus main ideas of the expert readers as a main idea of the text.

Test-takers would be expected to use inferencing strategies in dealing with items which relate to the original text by implication. Paraphrase items are predicted to generate a semantic matching strategy based on a recognition in the item of a macroproposition from the original text encoded in paraphrase form in the summary paragraph. These strategies were identified in large numbers in the analysis of the protocols, and will not be discussed further here (see Storey, 1994b, for a full discussion).

All items relating to rhetorical relations in the text, which include these discourse marker items, are predicted to activate test-takers' knowledge of text structure, of the normal sequence of information within specific text structures, and of the meaning of discourse markers. Since these aspects of reading behaviour are a particular focus of the discourse cloze item type, they will receive special attention in the discussion of observed behaviour which follows.

Table 1 Range and relation to text of discourse marker deletions   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item</td><td> Item range</td><td>Relation to original text</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Micro +</td><td>Implication</td></tr><tr><td>7</td><td> Micro +</td><td> Paraphrase</td></tr><tr><td>:</td><td> Macro</td><td>Paraphrase</td></tr><tr><td>9</td><td> Micro +</td><td>Paraphrase</td></tr><tr><td>10</td><td> Micro +</td><td> Paraphrase</td></tr><tr><td>12</td><td>Micro +</td><td>Paraphrase</td></tr></table></body></html>

# b Observed performance:

I think it's 'as a result' because the first sentence is a cause ... no ... is the reason that teachers can't solve the problem of the pupils.

I think the answer is 'as a result' because the inadvertent response is the result of the teacher's lack of awareness.

Teachers are unaware of the reasons so they cannot solve the problem. It's a cause and effect relationship.

That means that the children don't care about the punishment, they don't mind that they are doing something negative.

These extracts taken from the think-aloud protocols for the discourse marker items illustrate one of the strategies observed in subjects' testtaking behaviour for these items. Presented with paraphrased arguments juxtaposed in clauses but devoid of any overt markers of rhetorical relation, subjects have to analyse the relationships between the arguments in order to make the most logical connection between them. Recall of the propositional content of the original text helps to identify the appropriate relationship, but not directly since the arguments are stated in paraphrase form in the gapped passage, and may not follow the exact sequence that they follow in the original. Identifying the correct relationship is done by selecting the most suitable discourse marker from the multiple-choice options to make a connection which reflects the relationship expressed in the original text or in subjects' personal macropropositions for that text meaning.

The extracts show subjects attempting to analyse the relationships expressed in the passage. This process requires a careful analysis of the propositional content of the clauses to be joined and a decomposition of the rhetorical relationships underlying them. The high degree of rhetorical decomposition observed in the protocols marks a considerable success for this item type in generating the cognitive processes predicted by a model of ideal performance. The model, based largely on the van Dijk and Kintsch (1978; 1983) model of reading, identified two strategies as key elements - reference to a knowledge of text structure, and to an awareness of the normal sequencing of information in such structures. Subjects' behaviour in tackling the items as exemplified in the extracts above is a variety of rhetorical analysis or decomposition which appears to involve reference to these types of knowledge.

There are a few problems with these items, however, some of which relate to subjects' difficulties with the task. One of these problems relates to the range of the items as discussed above. These items were all judged to have a range above the sentence level, either because they referred to propositions outside the boundaries of their own sentence context, or because they required reference to the original text propositions or wording to make their meaning clear.

The range problem is illustrated by the two extracts which follow:

It's 'even though' because the first clause has an opposite meaning to the second clause.

Number twelve is 'therefore' because it is a continuation of the first clause to tell the cause first and then the consequence of their behaviour.

It is clear, in both these cases, that subjects were analysing rhetorical structure at the sentence level, and not referring to material outside the sentence boundaries. This localized rhetorical decomposition involves a knowledge of the meaning of discourse markers but does not involve a knowledge of text structure, nor does it entail intersentential comprehension. This behaviour pattern was quite common among the subject group and certainly detracts from the validity of the item type. This is especially true in the case of item 8, the only discourse marker item with a genuinely macro range, which is the subject of the first of the two examples quoted above.

It should be pointed out, however, that what is highlighted in the extracts quoted may not be the sole basis upon which the subjects made their choice of option to complete the gap. In the protocol data it is common to find that subjects were utilizing a number of information sources on which to base their decisions. Furthermore the subject group found item 8 rather easy and were able to select the correct option within a few seconds. This implies that their answering strategy would have been automatic and hence not accessible to introspection. Protocols produced for such automatic answering routines do not probe the cognitive processes underlying subject behaviour.

Another point that should be noted with respect to the quotations from subject protocols in this article is that they are 'cleaned up' versions of the originals which in their 'dirty' state contain a great deal more false starts, hestitations and miscues than are shown in these tidy versions. Cleaning up the protocols, however, was done only for ease of reading and care was taken not to add anything that was not expressed in the original. It is clear therefore that the subjects quoted thus far are able to describe complex relationships with some facility. The task of rhetorical decomposition is, however, a cognitively demanding one and not all subjects were able to accomplish it with such ease.

Subjects often reduced the cognitive demands of the task by translating the relationship or the discourse marker into terms which they were more familiar with personally, then making a selection of the option which matched their personalized term. This is illustrated by the following extracts:

As a result that means 'consequently'.   
It shows the consequence of doing something, you can say that it is the reason for them to behave in a disruptive manner so it must be 'therefore'.   
'Even though', that means DESPITE the attention gained in this way is negative ..   
They know the attention gained is negative BUT they still do it, so it's 'even though'.

Since most of these Chinese subjects were thinking out loud in English, language difficulties are likely to have led to problems in the effort to describe underlying rhetorical relationships. It may have been language difficulties or the high cognitive demands of the decomposition process that led to the tendency for subjects to give an impressionistic judgement, avoiding the need to undertake analytical elaboration. This is seen in the extracts which follow:

'As a result' is better than 'thereafter' because I think 'as a result' makes better sense. I just choose it according to the smoothness of the sentence when it is read. It may be the most suitable word because I can read the sentence in a more comfortable way. It cannot make the sentence more fluent. Thus may be a word adding to the intonation of the sentence. Other subjects clearly did not understand the meaning of some of the discourse markers they were presented with as options:

I'm not sure what the word 'thereafter' means so I've chosen C as the correct answer.

'Therefore' is the consequence, erm no it's the . . . because the phrase 'it brings some feeling of self esteem' says the reason and the consequence is, or the conclusion is 'preferable to receiving no attention at all' so 'therefore' is better.

'Consequently' means eventually.

It's quite hard to judge whether 'thus' or 'therefore' is the answer because they have quite similar meaning. Maybe 'therefore' is the answer, I am just guessing.

'However', 'therefore', and thus' are nearly the same. Which is better?

These problems indicate difficulty with the introspective task but do not necessarily indicate shortcomings of the item type in its ability to generate the target reading processes and strategies. We observe subjects considering the flow of the sentence - its 'smoothness' or 'intonation', in other words making judgements relating to coherence. Subjects trying to make choices between discourse markers which are close in meaning are eliminating options with reference to their understanding of the meaning of the discourse markers. In both cases, subjects are employing strategies and behaviours identified in the reading model underlying the test. The discourse marker items in this multiple-choice, rational deletion cloze item type were clearly able to generate discourse processing strategies and it can be asserted with some confidence that they are capable of generating cognitive processes representative of those which a recognized theory of the reading process would suggest are involved in performance of the domain of tasks in the real world.

# 2 Cohesive ties

Items 2, 3, 5, 11 and 13 consisted of deleted cohesive ties. Table 2 shows their range and relationship to the original text. As in the discussion of discourse marker items, strategies associated with the relationship of the items to the original text will not be discussed in detail here. Items based on implication tended to make subjects aware of what had not been explicitly stated in the original text. Items based on paraphrase were successful in encouraging subjects to look for propositions in the cloze passage which matched components of their personal macroproposition for the text meaning, or which could be seen, by reference back to the main text, to share semantic content with arguments in the original text.

The cohesive tie deletions are of two types: 1) repeated noun phrases or nouns - items 2, 3 and 11; and 2) lexical substitutes morphologically related to a noun which appears earlier in the passage - items 5 and 13. Distracters for these items were designed to play a similar function in the passage, but without the meaning development or logical cohesive function played by the correct option. These items were designed to generate intersentential processing strategies associated with recognition of the role of the deleted item in making connections between different parts of the text.

Table 2 Range and relation to text of cohesive tie deletions   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item</td><td>Item range</td><td>Relation to original text</td></tr><tr><td>?</td><td>Macro</td><td>Implication</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Macro</td><td>Implication</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>Macro</td><td> Implication</td></tr><tr><td>11</td><td>Macro</td><td> Paraphrase</td></tr><tr><td>13</td><td>Macro</td><td>Paraphrase</td></tr></table></body></html>

It is often difficult to identify, in the subjects' protocols, the behaviour predicted in the design of these items. What is observable in the protocol may not give a full picture of the subject's answering behaviour. Nevertheless, the picture which is provided by some protocols is sometimes surprising. For example, some subjects appear to select options merely on the basis of elimination:

Number 2 is A, 'such teachers' because B, C and D are wrong.

They seek 'attention', not 'nuisance' or 'punishment' nor 'praise'.

Others appear to select an option merely because it is the same or similar to another word earlier in the passage:

Because the very first word in the passage is 'teachers' so this tells me the correct answer.

Because the word 'insight' appears in the second sentence of the cloze passage.

Because the previous sentence mentioned the word 'reinforce'.

Motivation' appears on the third line of the summary passage and I think 'this motivation' refers to that; there is a connection between these sentences.

'These insights' the word 'these' provides a big clue to the answer.

'It would probably become clear to the teacher that ...' the phrase 'to the teacher' gives me the answer here.

Because the text has already mentioned that the home is the origin of disruptive behaviour.

Past passage has already said that this kind of problem originates at home.

If teachers are \*unaware of' the motivation, they will unintentionally reinforce it so the answer is 'awareness'.

With these items based on cohesive ties within the passage, it is often difficult to assess whether subjects have actually recognized cohesion or simply used a surface matching strategy to select an option. The behaviour in the nine extracts reproduced above is basically similar in that a connection is recognized. The extracts differ in the depth of processing which they exhibit. The earlier extracts appear to show pure surface matching; the later ones exhibit recognition of a connection between parts of the passage created by the repeated item or by a determiner acting anaphorically.

Paradoxically, the subjects who do not mention the connections established by these items are the ones who have clearly developed a greater understanding of the passage. The extracts which follow show this kind of naivete, where, apparently in blissful ignorance of a cohesive tie, subjects construct a cohesive meaning for the mutilated sentences they have just restored:

If they do not know the motivation behind disruptive behaviour, then they cannot recognize that sometimes the punishment they give will reinforce the poor behaviour.

It should be the result of the teacher's action. Ah! 'Reinforcement.' It is the result of the teacher's behaviour that prolongs the misbehaviour of the child instead of eliminating it.

Because it is the task of the teacher to understand the pupil and to help them with a proper solution.

The motivation behind this disruptive behaviour can benefit the teachers and if the teachers know the way they can think about some measures or solutions to solve the problem.

I think it should be lacking' knowledge about the reasons for the misbehaviour of the pupils. So it should be 'teachers lacking these insights' because it is referring to knowledge of the motivation behind disruptive behaviour.

'Originating in the home' that means they have gained the same attention from their family so they do the same thing in the school.

This kind of elaboration of the restored meaning of the text is a much clearer indication of intersentential comprehension than the earlier extracts which fulfilled the predictions of the test designer in showing subjects explicitly recognizing cohesion. In those protocols, recognizing cohesion consists of a mechanical process of matching which need not entail comprehension at all. The elaboration strategy, on the other hand, clearly involves a greater depth of processing. Elaboration in these examples is akin to the kind of meaning construction representative of reading in the real world and gives a demonstration of the construct validity of the cohesive tie items in this discourse cloze test.

# VI Conclusions and limitations

The processes generated by the two types of item in the discourse cloze test have been revealed and the items have been shown to have varying degrees of construct validity as a result. If the item is able to generate processes identified in a theoretical model of the reading process it can be shown to have a good level of construct validity. If alternative processes, irrelevant to the underlying construct, are generated, the validity of the item is called into question. Items consisting of deleted discourse markers encouraged subjects to decompose the associated arguments and analyse the rhetorical structure of the text in some depth. Items consisting of deleted cohesive ties were less successful since a variety of surface matching was shown to be possible in reaching a solution. Subjects who failed to mention the presence of cohesive ties provided more convincing evidence of deep processing being generated by the items. The fact that the items were capable of generating construct-relevant processing nevertheless suggested that they have a good degree of validity.

Analysing the test-taking process provides evidence of the validity of test items and testing techniques by revealing whether or not they generate the processes which theory tells us are involved in the performance of the ability being tested. If test items generate other processes, then they are not testing what they are designed to test, in other words they lack construct validity. Process studies therefore provide the opportunity to end controversies such as the context debate in the cloze literature by providing conclusive evidence of what cloze measures. This opportunity was partially realized by the findings of this study in respect of one variety of cloze, but there are at least two major limitations in the study which call for caution in interpretation of the results.

First, the subjects selected for the study were not representative of the target population of students entering the Institute of Education, because their proficiency in English was above average. For ease of analysis, it was decided to encourage subjects to use English rather than their native Cantonese for their think-alouds and two criteria were set for the selection of subjects - high oral proficiency in English and being an English major. Thus the English proficiency of the subjects would be well above average, which would mean that the test tasks would be relatively easy for them to perform. The difficulty of having to introspect on their performance would compensate for this somewhat, by imposing an additional layer of difficulty on the test tasks. Nevertheless the processes employed by proficient subjects are likely to be different from those used by students of a lower level of proficiency.

Secondly, the need to introspect may have altered the performance of the task so that additional or different processes were employed. In fact the think-aloud method employed in the study was carefully designed to replicate naturally occurring behaviour. Subjects in pilot studies had tended to think aloud while doing the task and, when they had found a solution, to look back and comment on their work. This unprompted use of concurrent introspection followed by immediate retrospection in the pilot studies was encouraged in the training of subjects for the major study. Even though a certain ecological validity can be claimed for the variety of introspective technique employed in the study, the influence of introspection on task performance cannot be dismissed. The elaboration strategy, for example, was particularly widespread in protocols and was associated with the immediate retrospection subjects were asked to carry out. Having made a choice of multiple-choice option it would seem normal to attempt to accommodate it with one's conception of the overall text meaning. This would appear to be a natural part of the test-taking process which the elaboration strategy mirrors. However, the possibility that subjects were prompted to adopt this additional process by their introspective training cannot be dismissed.

# VII References

Alderson, J.C. 1978: A study of the cloze procedure with native and nonnative speakers of English. Unpublished PhD thesis, University of Edinburgh. 1979: The cloze procedure and proficiency in English as a foreign language. TESOL Quarterly 13, 219-27. 1983: The cloze procedure and proficiency in English as a foreign language. In Oller, J.W. jr, editor, Issues in language testing, Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 219-28.   
Bachman, L.F. 1982; The trait structure of cloze test scores. TEsOL Quarterly 16, 61-70. - 1985: Performance on cloze tests with fixed ratio and rational deletions. TEsOL Quarterly 19, 535-56.   
Bensoussan, M. 1990: Redundancy and the cohesion cloze. Journal of Research in Reading 13, 18-77.   
Bensoussan, M. and Mauranen, A. 1989: SeDelGap tests of macro-level reading comprehension: an exercise in international collaboration (ERIC Document Reproduction Service accession no. ED309644).   
Bensoussan, M. and Ramraz, R. 1984: Testing EFL reading comprehension using a multiple-choice rational cloze. Modern Language Journal 68, 230-39.   
Brown, J.D. 1988: Tailored cloze: improved with classical item analysis techniques. Language Testing 5, 19-31. 1993: What are the characteristics of natural cloze tests? Language Testing 10, 93-116.   
Chavez-Oller, M.A., Chihara, T., Weaver, K.A. and Oller, J.W. jr 1985: When are cloze items sensitive to constraints across sentences? Language Learning 35, 181-206.   
Chihara, T., Oller, J., Weaver, K. and Chavez-Oller, M.A. 1977: Are cloze tests sensitive to constraints across sentences? Language Learning 27, 63-73.   
Cohen, A.D. 1984: On taking language tests: what the students report. Language Testing 1, 70-81.   
Coniam, D. 1993: Co-text or no text? A study of an adapted cloze technique for testing comprehension/summary skills. Hong Kong Papers in Linguistics and Language Teaching 16, 1-10.   
Deyes, T. 1984: Towards an authentic Discourse Cloze'. Applied Linguistics 5, 128-37.   
Fontana, D. 1988: Psychology for teachers (2nd edn). London: British Psychological Association in association with Macmillan.   
Fotos, S.S. 1991: The cloze test as an integrative measure of EFL proficiency: a substitute for essays on college entrance examinations? Language Learning 41, 313-36.   
Halliday, M.A.K. and Hasan, R. 1976: Cohesion in English. London: Longman.   
Jonz, J. 1976: Improving on the basic egg: the MC cloze. Language Learning 26, 255-65. 1987: Textual cohesion and second-language comprehension. Language Learning 37, 409-38. 1990: Another turn in the conversation: what does cloze measure? TESOL Quarterly 24, 61-83.   
Kintsch, W. and van Dijk, T.A. 1978: Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological Review 85, 363-94.   
Klein-Braley, C. 1983: A cloze is a cloze is a question. In Oller, J.W. jr, editor, Issues in language testing, Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 218-28.   
Lennon, R.T. 1956: Assumptions underlying the use of content validity. Educational and Psychological Measurement 16, 294-304.   
Levenston, E.A., Nir, N. and Blum-Kulka, S. 1984: Discourse analysis and the testing of reading comprehension by cloze techniques. In Pugh, A.K. and Ulijn, J.M., editors, Reading for professional purposes: studies and practices in native and foreign languages, London: Heinemann Educational, 202-12.   
Markham, P.L. 1987: Rational deletion cloze processing strategies: ESL and native English. System 15, 303-11. 1988: The cloze procedure and intersentential comprehension in college-level German. International Review of Applied Linguistics 26, 44-51.   
Mauranen, A. 1988: The Semantic Cloze: an approach to testing EFL reading. Paper presented at TESOL convention, Chicago, March. 1989: Can gaps measure comprehension? Modifications of cloze as tests of reading. In Lauren, C. and Nordman, M., editors, Special language, Clevedon: Multilingual Matters, 337-46.   
McKenna, M.C. and Layton, K. 1990: Concurrent validity of cloze as a measure of intersentential comprehension. Journal of Educational Psychology 82, 372-77.   
Oller, J.W. jr 1973: Cloze tests of language proficiency and what they measure. Language Learning 23, 105-18.   
Oller, J.W. jr and Conrad, C.A. 1971: The cloze technique and ESL proficiency. Language Learning 21, 183-95.   
Pollitt, A.B. and Hutchinson, C.J. 1987: The English language skills profile: 14-- 16. Basingstoke: Macmillan Educational.   
Porter, D. 1975: Modified cloze procedure: a more valid reading comprehension test. English Language Teaching Journal 30, 151-55. -1978: Cloze procedure and equivalence. Language Learning 28, 333-41. 1983: The effects of quantity of context on the ability to make linguistic predictions: a flaw in a measure of general proficiency. In Hughes, A. and Porter, D., editors, Current developments in language testing, London: Academic Press, 63-74.   
Sarig, G. 1989: Testing meaning construction: can we do it fairly? Language Testing, 6, 77-94.   
Storey, P.R.G. 1994a: Reading and problem solving: the interaction of individual differences and task types. In Nunan, D., Berry, V. and Berry, R., editors, Proceedings of the International Language in Education conference 1994, Hong Kong. 1994b: Investigating construct validity through test-taker introspection. Unpublished PhD thesis, Department of Linguistic Science, University of Reading. 1995: Developing and validating a taxonomy of test-taking strategies. In Proceedings of the conference on Testing and Evaluation in Second Language Education, Hong Kong University of Science and Technology.   
van Dijk, T.A. and Kintsch, W. 1983: Strategies of discourse comprehension. New York: Academic Press.

# Appendix: Multiple-choice, rational deletion discourse cloze test

The text below is a summary of the main ideas of the text 'The Origins of Undesirable Classroom Behaviour'. The paragraph expresses these ideas in the same order as the original, but uses different words to do so. Choose from A), B), C) and D) below, the best word or words to complete the thirteen gaps in the summary paragraph. CHECK YOUR ANSWERS BY REFERRING BACK TO THE TEXT. Then write your answers on the answer sheet.

Teachers are often unaware of the reasons for problem behaviour exhibited by pupils in their classes, and, .. (1).., inadvertently respond in ways which prolong it. Insights into the motivation behind disruptive behaviour could benefit _ (2) .._. in practical ways. Teachers lacking (3) unintentionally reinforce poor behaviour by the ways they (4)  it and the strategies they use in trying to deal with it. (5) _ leads to a behaviour being perpetuated rather than (6). The origins of disruptive classroom behaviour can often be found in the home background of the children concerned. Children need adult attention (7) feel that they count for something as people. If they do not receive the attention naturally in the home they learn that they can get some form of attention by making a nuisance of themselves. (8) _ the attention gained in this way is negative in character, it brings some feeling of self-esteem and is (9)

preference to receiving no attention at all. What these children have learned at home is carried with them to school. They may lack the ability of children from better backgrounds and  (10) find that they do not receive the same degree of teacher acceptance or praise. In order to receive any kind of  (11)  from the teacher or from their peers _ (12) _, they call attention to themselves in class by behaving in a disruptive manner, or by making trifling demands with increasing insistence, or by challenging the teacher's authority. This frustrated striving for attention, (13) in the home, is a major cause of behaviour problems in school, and is referred to as attentionseeking behaviour.

Circle your choice of word(s) to complete the gaps:

#

A c D 1. moreover nevertheless as a result thereafter 2. such teachers such pupils schools us 3. awareness this motivation these reasons these insights 4. behave answer attend react 5. Reinforcement Attention Response Insight 6. prolonged extinguished deferred delimited 7. when they because they in order to and 8. Even though When Besides Thus 9. moreover additionally therefore nevertheless 10. apparently subsequently unfortunately consequently 11. nuisance attention punishment praise 12. however thus on the other therefore hand 13. originating which behaving favoured