# Interactive discourse structuring in L2 guest lectures: some insights from a comparative corpus-based study§

Belinda Crawford Camiciottoli\*

Faculty of Economics, University of Florence, Via Curtatone 1, 50123 Firenze, Italy

# Abstract

Interactive discourse structuring is used to guide listeners through on-going speech and has been shown to have a positive effect on lecture comprehension, particularly in L2 settings. As mobility increases in the academic world, there are more opportunities for lecture events characterized not only by linguistic/cultural diversity, but also by unfamiliarity between lecturers and audiences. In these situations, interactive discourse structuring may have an especially important role. This study compares interactive discourse structuring used by guest lecturers (both L1 and L2) versus L1 classroom lecturers. Using corpus methodology, interactive discourse structuring was found to be most frequent among L2 guest lecturers, least frequent among L1 guest lecturers, with L1 classroom lecturers falling in the middle. The results suggest that linguistic/cultural diversity has more influence on discourse structuring than participant unfamiliarity. In addition, the analysis revealed other trends, particularly the very wide range of vocabulary used in discourse structuring expressions by all speakers. The findings can be implemented towards developing more authentic academic listening materials, as well as guidelines for both native and non-native guest lecturers who interact with international audiences.

$©$ 2003 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Academic lectures; L2 listening comprehension; Discourse structuring; Discourse analysis; Intercultural communication; Corpus methodology; Guest lectures

# 1. Introduction

Although research on spoken academic discourse still lags behind its written counterpart, over the last 15 years or so some work has been done with university lectures and how they are structured. This includes some descriptive analyses focusing on linguistic features that carry out the specific function of guiding listeners through the lecture, often referred to as discourse structuring. This term has been used in variety of ways, ranging from paragraph or sentence-level organization (e.g. problem-solution) to small micro-markers (e.g. So, OK, Right). In this study, it will be used to refer to what Chaudron and Richards (1986) first called ‘‘macro-markers’’. These are metadiscursive comments on how the lecture itself will be organized, or phrases which signal to listeners what is about to happen. (e.g. What I’m going to talk about today, First let’s take a look at, We’ll come back to that later, You’ll see that in just a minute). They are typically ‘chunks’ based on first and second person pronouns and modal/semi-modal verbs, thus constituting a form of interaction between lecturer and audience that interrupts the flow of informational content.

In an early study, Rounds (1987) investigated the use of personal pronouns in university mathematics lectures. She found that first person pronouns were frequently associated with phrases carrying out the discourse function of announcing future actions (e.g. what I’d like to do today). In one of the most comprehensive works of its type, Young (1990, 1994) describes lectures as a series of five different interweaving ‘‘phases’’: content, discourse structuring, conclusion, evaluation and interaction. Among these, the discourse structuring phase plays a crucial role in telling the audience which direction the lecture will take (e.g. so what I will do now is give you a description). Rilling (1996) observed high frequencies of certain four-word lexical phrases functioning as topic markers (e.g. we‘re gonna look at) and topic shifters (e.g. I would like to) in her corpus of university lectures. Mauranen (2001) discusses ‘‘discourse reflexivity’’ as a key feature of lectures from the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE).1 She found an abundance of metadiscursive monologic expressions used to structure on-going speech. These include prospective devices to signal what is about to come (e.g. today we’re gonna talk a little bit about), as well as what is being put aside for the moment (e.g. an issue worth mentioning but not today).

Other studies in the area of academic listening have investigated the role of discourse structuring on lecture comprehension. As pointed out by some authors (Khuwaileh, 1999; Olsen & Huckin, 1990; Thompson, 1994), lecture comprehension continues to represent a major obstacle for many non-native speakers, regardless of proficiency level. Discourse structuring devices have been found to have a positive effect on lecture comprehension, particularly with audiences of non-native speakers. In their pioneering study, Chaudron and Richards (1986) found that the presence of macro-markers (e.g. what I’m going to talk about today) improved retention and recall in post-listening tests. DeCarrico and Nattinger (1988) suggest that formulaic and well-known lexical phrases (e.g. we’ll be looking at) help students to activate content schemata. Khuwaileh (1999) determined that introductory chunks (e.g. today we will be examining) were beneficial in guiding students through a science lecture given by a native English speaker. Further evidence for the importance of discourse structuring for successful lecture comprehension in cross-cultural settings comes from research dealing with the communication difficulties of non-native university teachers. Tyler, Jeffries, and Davies (1988) found that the incorrect or unexpected use of lexicalized discourse markings by international teaching assistants caused comprehension problems for their audiences of native English speakers. For example, the non-native speakers often overused the coordinating conjunction and as a generic discourse marker to substitute clearer topic shifters such as Let’s turn to the next point. In her study comparing the use of discourse markers used by nativespeaking versus non-native-speaking teaching assistants, Williams (1992) comments that non-native speakers need to make more explicit use of discourse markers to compensate for other problems relating to pronunciation and grammatical accuracy.

These studies have taken place in ESL or EFL classroom contexts where nonnative students attended lectures during long-term degree programs and were generally familiar with the lecturer and academic setting. However, as mobility increases in the academic world, different types of cross-cultural lecture experiences are becoming more and more frequent. Whether abroad or in their home countries, students have opportunities to hear lectures given by visiting speakers. Although guest lectures are a tradition in higher education, they are becoming increasingly popular in L2 settings in an effort to expose learners to a wide variety of listening experiences. In fact, guest lecturers are recruited not only from the academic and professional communities, but also from different linguistic/cultural backgrounds. Thus, the guest lecture is an effective way of achieving the ‘international perspective’ that is now essential in many disciplines, particularly the social sciences. However, in addition to linguistic/cultural diversity among participants, this scenario is also characterized by mutual unfamiliarity in which various factors come into play. Guest lecturers may lack knowledge of the institutional setting and the students’ backgrounds, while their audiences are faced with variables such as individual lecturing style, degree of formality, use of idiomatic language and accent.

The objective of this study was to shed light on the role of interactive discourse structuring in L2 guest lectures. More specifically, a corpus of L2 guest lectures was compared with a corpus of L1 classroom lectures in order to investigate the influence of three variables inherent to L2 guest lectures: the language of the speaker, the language of the listeners and unfamiliarity among participants. Building on previous research,2 the underlying hypothesis was that interactive discourse structuring would be more prominent in the L2 guest lectures, possibly in relation to the three contextual variables. A better understanding of how these guest lecturers use interactive discourse structuring can be useful for developing more effective teaching strategies for this type of lecture event.

# 2. Methodology

The methodological approach is grounded in corpus linguistics, which studies language by collecting and electronically storing authentic written and spoken discourse. Text analysis software is then used to generate quantitative data on various linguistic features, with results also serving as a launching pad for more in-depth qualitative analyses. Corpus methodology provides invaluable language-in-use insights for both linguistics research and language teaching.

# 2.1. The corpora

A corpus of L2 guest lectures was compiled over a 2-year period and consists of the transcriptions (45,560 words) of five video/audio taped lectures given by visiting academics at the Faculty of Economics of the University of Florence (Italy). The lectures were transcribed according to simplified conversation analysis transcription conventions adapted for monologic lecture discourse. Two of the lecturers were native speakers of British English, while the remaining three were non-native speakers. Thus, in addition to unfamiliarity, the corpus reflects the mixture of language backgrounds often found in L2 guest lectures (i.e. L1 or L2 lecturers with mixed nationality L2 audiences). While this small sample limited to five individuals clearly precludes broad generalizations about the discourse structuring features of L2 guest lectures, the corpus can nonetheless offer interesting insights. In fact, because of its small size, it is possible to systematically ‘go back to the text’ in order to further analyze and interpret trends emerging from quantitative analysis, also in light of the pedagogical purposes of this study.

The lectures were organized within the framework of the European Business Module, a cycle of guest lectures offered as a credit-bearing undergraduate course to a limited number of both Italian and international students. The primary aim of the guest lecture cycle was to introduce students to aspects of business and industry in different European countries. Class sizes were relatively small, ranging from 20 to 40 students. The two researchers involved in collecting the corpus were present during all lectures to take field notes. Table 1 provides an overview of the guest lecture corpus.

Fourteen lectures (143,241 words) were then selected from the MICASE online corpus for comparative purposes. Even if these lectures delivered at one North American university may not be entirely representative of L1 classroom lectures in general, they present key differences in terms of the characterizing features of L2 guest lectures. The MICASE lectures all took place during a regular academic term (i.e. framed by previous and successive class meetings), meaning that participants were familiar with each other. They were all given by native speakers of American English to audiences of primarily native speakers. Although today’s university lecture audiences are increasingly unlikely to include exclusively native speakers, the MICASE lectures represent an L1 context as the participants share the same immediate speech community. More specifically, when native speakers lecture in their native environments, their communicative approach is likely to be ‘native-tonative’, even if audiences may include some non-native speakers. Other variables, such as class size $( < 4 0 )$ and academic level (undergraduate), were kept constant since it seemed that these factors could cause significant differences in the type of language used. However, the MICASE lectures comprise a variety of topics 3 since a sufficient number of lectures within the same academic discipline was not available.

Table 1 The guest lecture corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Lecture 1</td><td>Lecture 2</td><td>Lecture 3</td><td>Lecture 4</td><td>Lecture 5</td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer</td><td>British</td><td>British</td><td>Italian</td><td>German</td><td> Spanish</td></tr><tr><td>Topic</td><td>SMEsa</td><td>A survey of</td><td>UK Regional</td><td>SMEs in the</td><td>Local productive</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>in the UK</td><td>business strategies in the UK</td><td>Policy</td><td>Aachen region</td><td>systems in Spain</td></tr></table></body></html>

a SMEs $=$ small and medium sized enterprises

With reference to lecture delivery, both corpora reflect what Dudley-Evans (1994) calls the ‘‘conversational’’ style, as opposed to the ‘‘reading’’ or ‘‘rhetorical’’ styles. In the conversational lecture, the topic has been planned but not the actual speech. It is characterized by disfluencies such as false starts, hesitations and fillers (Chafe, 1985). All of the lectures showed varying degrees of interaction between lecturers and audiences. In both corpora, there were episodes of audience participation in form of direct questions. Two guest lecturers (one native and one non-native speaker) moved towards more active learning, interspersing the monologic mode with moments of group work followed by student presentations. Judging from direct observation, none of the guest lecturers attempted to simplify their language either lexically or syntactically. Nor did they appear to notably reduce their speech rate to facilitate comprehension for their international audiences.4 In terms of language, the lectures of both corpora generally exhibit what Swales (in preparation) refers to as the ‘‘open style’’ in spoken academic discourse. This is characterized by strong signals of the speaker’s presence (e.g. metadiscourse, expressions of stance, hedging), informal textual connectives and context-bound references, while at the same time featuring noun groups that reflect the specialized vocabulary of the topic at hand.

# 2.2. The analysis

Interactive discourse structuring was analyzed in both corpora on the basis of three principal grammatical/lexical patterns:

1. PRONOUN $^ +$ MODAL/SEMI-MODAL $^ +$ MAIN VERB (e.g. We will/’ll talk about)   
2. LET+PRONOUN $^ +$ MAIN VERB (e.g. Let me turn)   
3. PRONOUN $^ +$ WANT $^ +$ INFINITIVE (e.g. I want to look)

The first two patterns were suggested by the literature (DeCarrico & Nattinger, 1988; Fortanet, in press; Rounds, 1987), as well as initial work with the guest lecture corpus itself. In contrast, the third pattern with want emerged only after beginning to work with the two corpora.

Although discourse structuring can also be retrospective in nature (e.g. as I said before), this study is limited to those forward-looking patterns that announce upcoming moments within the lecture as a self-contained event. Since guest lectures do not entail ongoing relationships between lecturers and audiences, retrospective discourse structuring is of less interest. For example, there will be no instances of phrases such as last week we looked at, which instead would presumably be rather common in a regular classroom setting.

The software program Wordsmith Tools (Scott, 1998) was used to quantify all instances of interactive discourse structuring in both corpora based on the three principal patterns. More specifically, the concordancing tool generated vertical lists of all searched items, along with some co-text to the right and left. This allowed for all instances to be located and clearly laid out for further analysis. A sample of concordance output for We will/we $ l l +$ main verb is shown in Appendix A.

Once the concordances of all the various patterns had been produced, it was necessary to hand edit the output in order to eliminate those which did not function as discourse structuring (e.g. reported speech, embedded narratives, hypothetical uses such as Let’s say, and utterances produced by members of the audience). Most instances were fairly straightforward and could be determined on the basis of the concordance line alone. Some cases were more ambiguous. To determine whether these patterns could be considered as discourse structuring or not, it was necessary to go back to the original text files for more co-text. These instances were usually clarified by the presence of some temporal element (e.g. now, today, later on, in a moment) found in the co-text that signaled the pattern as relating to the lecture itself.

During this process, it also became necessary to further fine-tune my definition of discourse structuring. More specifically, there were instances of patterns that referred to ‘logistical’ matters:

1) Lemme turn these lights down so we can see what’s going on here. (MICASE)

Since this type of utterance does not refer to the organization of the content of the lecture, cases of this type were excluded. However, an utterance such as example no. 8 would instead be considered discourse structuring. Even though it refers to a ‘logistical’ blackboard, the intent is towards the content that is written on the blackboard.

(2) Actually I want to start with the blackboard today (Guest/NNS)

There were also a few cases in which even with expanded co-text, it was not possible to determine whether the utterance was discourse structuring or not (e.g. false starts, interrupted phrases). These have been left as unclassified.

# 3. Results and discussion

Table 2 illustrates the distribution of interactive discourse structuring patterns at three different levels: native speakers of the guest lecture corpus (Guest/NS subcorpus), non-native speakers of the guest lecture corpus (Guest/NNS subcorpus) and the MICASE corpus. The guest lectures were analyzed at the NS/NNS subcorpus level to better understand the influence of speaker language background. Rather than indicating simple frequency counts, the data is reported according to the normalized parameter of tokens per 10,000 words. In this way, it is possible to make meaningful comparisons between corpora/subcorpora of different sizes (i.e. word counts), as in this case.

As can be seen, interactive discourse structuring is most frequent in the Guest/ NNS subcorpus, least frequent in the Guest/NS subcorpus, with the MICASE corpus falling in the middle. While the high frequency among NNS guest lecturers is in line with the expectation that the guest lectures would generally contain more discourse structuring, the low frequency among the NS guest lecturers is not.

To seek possible explanations, it seemed important to identify major differences at the level of individual patterns. The highest frequency of discourse structuring among NNS guest lecturers can be traced to primarily I/we/you will patterns, which instead do not present particularly large differences between the two sets of native speakers. The concordance lines of these patterns were re-examined, focusing on differences in verbs that had been used. As shown in examples (3) and (4), one verb that showed notable variation was explain (1.3 Guest/NNS versus 0 Guest/NS versus 0.07 MICASE per 10,000 words). Although the NNS guest lecturers may have been responding to perceived lack of comprehension on the part of the audience, their greater use of explain seems more likely to reflect a concern to reassure audiences that things would be fully elucidated during the course of the lecture. This may derive from an understanding of students’ potential difficulties with which they could identify as non-native speakers themselves.

Table 2 Discourse structuring patterns in the guest lecture corpus versus the MICASE lecture corpus   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Discourse structuring pattern</td><td colspan="3">Tokens per 10,000 words</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Guest/NS</td><td>Guest/NNS</td><td>MICASE</td></tr><tr><td>Pronoun + modal/semi-modal</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>We will/We&#x27;ll.</td><td>3.0</td><td>9.9</td><td>4.6</td></tr><tr><td>I will/I&#x27;ll</td><td>3.5</td><td>8.1</td><td>3.3</td></tr><tr><td>You will/You&#x27;ll.</td><td>1.4</td><td>5.5</td><td>0.7</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m going to.</td><td>1.3</td><td></td><td>1.0</td></tr><tr><td>We are/We&#x27;re going to</td><td></td><td>0.7</td><td>0.7</td></tr><tr><td>I&#x27;m gonna</td><td>0.2</td><td>-</td><td>2.5</td></tr><tr><td>We&#x27;re gonna</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1.4</td></tr><tr><td>I would/I&#x27;d</td><td></td><td>0.7</td><td>0.6</td></tr><tr><td>Pronoun + want.</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>I want</td><td>1.1</td><td>2.4</td><td>1.0</td></tr><tr><td>I wanna</td><td>-</td><td></td><td>1.6</td></tr><tr><td>We wanna</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>0.2</td></tr><tr><td>You wanna</td><td></td><td></td><td>0.07</td></tr><tr><td>Let + pronoun</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Let&#x27;s</td><td>0.7</td><td>3.2</td><td>4.0</td></tr><tr><td>Let me</td><td>-</td><td>0.7</td><td>2.7</td></tr><tr><td>Lemme</td><td>-</td><td>-</td><td>0.3</td></tr><tr><td>Non classifiable</td><td>0.2</td><td>-</td><td>0.1</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td>11.4</td><td>31.2</td><td>24.8</td></tr></table></body></html>

(3) I will explain you two examples later (Guest/NNS) (4) I will explain the limitations of this at the end (Guest/NNS)

Another verb used frequently by the NNS guest lecturers was try (1.3 Guest/NNS versus 0 Guest/NS versus 0.1 MICASE per 10,000 words), as shown in example (5). They seemed to wish to appear more politely ‘modest’, perhaps due to language-related insecurity. In contrast, the very few instances of try in the MICASE lectures all involve the dynamics of keeping the lecture moving [example (6)], rather than ‘lecturing ability’.

(5) I will try to advise you that here there’s not a contradiction (Guest/NNS) (6) I’ll try to move relatively quickly (MICASE)

For you/we will patterns, the verb see was used more frequently by the NNS guest lecturers (6.8 Guest/NNS versus 0.4 Guest/NS versus 0.8 MICASE per 10,000 words). As illustrated by example (7), see was used to announce upcoming visuals by both NS and NNS guest lecturers (1.3 Guest/NNS vs. 0.9 Guest/NS vs. 0.1 MICASE per 10,000 words), suggesting that visuals had a generally more important role in the guest lectures. However, the NNS guest lecturers more frequently used see metaphorically to express the cognitive concept understand (3.7 Guest/NNS versus 1.1 Guest/NS versus 0.4 MICASE per 10,000 words) [example (8)]. Again, they appeared particularly keen on reassuring the students. On the other hand, this repeated reassurance could also be self-directed as a way to deal with the uncertainties arising from this intercultural context.

(7) Right so you’ll see some UK figures in a minute (Guest/NS)   
(8) But in a way in which we’ll see better in a moment (Guest/NNS)

The strong presence of I/we/you will patterns with the above verbs suggests that the higher frequency of discourse structuring among the NNS guest lecturers is influenced mostly by the language background of the speaker. Compared with native speakers, they probably have a heightened awareness of comprehension problems, leading to a stronger effort to facilitate their audiences. At the same time, they may have been coping (even sub-consciously) with the problems that can arise when lecturing in a foreign language in which one is more or less proficient.

Noticeable differences were also found in patterns based on the inclusive form let (3.9 Guest/NNS versus 0.7 Guest/NS versus 7.1 MICASE per 10,000 words). The highest frequency of these patterns among the MICASE lecturers could be accounted for by the ‘camaraderie’ stemming from a high level of familiarity established in an on-going course. The NNS guest lecturers also used this pattern more than the NS guest lecturers, possibly as a strategy to maintain contact with their audiences, again seeking to ensure comprehension. On the other side of the coin, the lowest frequency of discourse structuring patterns in general among the NS guest lecturers could be associated with a combined effect of less concern with and awareness of language issues, as well as less motivation or opportunity to establish a group atmosphere.

On a global level, the analysis highlights a difference in the use of the phonologica reductions gonna, wanna and lemme [examples (9–11)]. These appear almost exclu sively in the MICASE corpus, with only case of gonna produced by a NS guest lecturer.

(9) These are some of the techniques we’re gonna discuss (MICASE) (10) Today I wanna shift um to this coastal region (MICASE) (11) Okay lemme tell you a little bit about this little thing (MICASE)

One possible explanation is that there were no native speakers of American English among the guest lecturers. In their discussion of dialectic differences in modal and semi-modal usage, Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad, and Finegan (1999) report that the semi-modal form going to (including gonna) is more common in American conversational English. In fact, there were relatively few instances of going to, with both native and non-native speakers preferring to use forms of will. However, the difference might also be influenced by the language background of the lecturers and participant unfamiliarity. Phonological reductions may not come naturally to nonnative speakers. Yet neither did the British lecturers favour these forms, which might mean that they were at least to some extent monitoring their speech for their international audiences after all. In addition, the guest lecturers were interacting with their audiences for a very limited period of time. Thus, they had no opportunity to establish the relaxed climate of on-going relationships, which might lead to more casual language. It is also possible that all of these factors acted in synergy to contribute to this difference between the MICASE corpus and the guest lecture corpus as a whole.

Further examination of the concordance lines highlighted two other interesting trends. Although the frequencies involved are not particularly high, the fact that these patterns appeared exclusively in the MICASE corpus was worth looking into. The future progressive tense was used 14 times (nine of which with the verb talk) [examples (12) and (13)]. This could be due to the more on-going nature of the MICASE lectures. In fact, as part of semester-long courses, these lectures contribute to a progressive learning experience developed over a series of class meetings, rather than being concentrated into a single event, as in the case of the guest lectures.

(12) We’re going to be talking about it today (MICASE) (13) We’ll also be be using the idea of risk (MICASE)

The phrasal verbs go through and go over were also present only in the MICASE lectures (seven instances). They seemed to function as a variation of talk about, but with a slight twist, that is, to talk about systematically [examples (14) and (15)]. This may be linked to the more complex and theoretical nature of the MICASE lecture topics compared with the essentially descriptive lectures given by the guest speakers.

(14) We’ll go over it one piece at a time okay? (15) And I’m gonna go through and give you some examples

During the analysis, another feature that came to the forefront was the very wide variety of verbs used in both corpora, and by both native and non-native speakers. Contributing to this were a number of action verbs that were used figuratively as alternatives to the verb of speech talk, as shown in the following examples:

(16) Okay let me mo- move on to reliability then (move on $=$ talk about something different) (MICASE)   
(17) I’m going to pick up a little bit in chapter twelve (pick up $=$ continue talking about) (MICASE)   
(18) That’s an important issue and we’ll come back to that (come back $=$ talk about it again) (Guest/NS)   
(19) I think I will cut these a bit short (cut $=$ talk about less) (Guest/NNS)

However, the most ‘creative’ verb choices were found only in the MICASE corpus [examples (20–22)]. As L1 lecturers, they were likely to use this type of language more spontaneously, particularly within the familiar atmosphere of on-going courses. Moreover, since they were lecturing in an L1 environment, they could also be confident that these expressions would be understood.

(20) Well lemme shift gears for a few minutes now (21) I’d like to just put that on the table (22) Well anything else we wanna touch on

Appendix B provides a list of the 90 different verbs found in both corpora.

To conclude this discussion of discourse structuring patterns, a word about the use of pronouns in general is in order. In both the MICASE corpus and the NS/ NNS guest subcorpora, discourse structuring patterns using $I$ were more frequent than those with we. The same tendency was noted in a recent study by Fortanet (in press). Although she analyzed the use of pronouns and their semantic mappings in a variety of discourse functions, she also found that we was less frequent than $I$ in university lectures from the MICASE corpus. Because these findings are in contrast with Rounds’ (1987) earlier study, Fortanet suggests that university lectures are becoming more personalized and with more focus on individuals. The wide variety of vocabulary found in the discourse structuring patterns of the lectures in this study would seem to support this idea.

# 4. Concluding remarks

While interactive discourse structuring was not found to be generally more frequent in the L2 guest lectures as expected, the results nonetheless provide some important insights about how the variables involved in L2 guest lectures can affect discourse structuring. The highest frequency of discourse structuring among NNS guest lecturers suggests that speaker language background has a strong influence. Their non-native speaker status seemed to prompt them to use discourse structuring expressions not only to help the L2 listeners, but also for their own language-related needs. Contextual unfamiliarity does not appear to have a particularly stimulating effect on discourse structuring as indicated by the low frequency among NS guest lecturers. On the other hand, it is possible that some of the high frequency among the NNS guest lecturers was also influenced also by this variable. To more clearly distinguish the roles of language background and unfamiliarity, this type of research would need be conducted under conditions allowing for strict control and matching of variables (e.g. guest lectures versus non-guest lectures or L1 versus L2 lecturers in the same academic contexts). This would probably be feasible only in a carefully constructed experimental approach, which actually would not reflect the ‘messy’ reality of today’s L2 guest lecture events. For this reason, even if not entirely conclusive, these findings still contribute to a better understanding of the language used in authentic L2 guest lectures.

This study also suggests a number of possibilities for further research. Clearly, it would be important to expand the guest lecture corpus to include more speakers. In fact, the limited sample size necessitates a cautious interpretation of the findings. More lectures would also put the ‘personal’ dimension in a better perspective. As Goffman (1981) points out, lecturing is also very much a matter of the individual style and personality of the lecturer, something that could only be investigated with many more cases. Another significant source of knowledge would be information gleaned directly from guest lecturers through interviews or questionnaires in order to reveal more about their language and context-related choices, strategies and impressions.

There are also other variables beyond those addressed in this study that could have an impact on interactive discourse structuring. Firstly, there is the issue of content. The guest lectures were quite homogeneous in that they all dealt with the same subject area, while the MICASE lectures addressed a wide variety of topics. Further research with a disciplinary focus would likely reveal interesting differences in how lecture discourse is organized in various academic fields. Secondly, the two lecture corpora compared in this study actually have somewhat different communicative purposes. The guest lectures introduced students to aspects of business in different European countries and were thus mainly descriptive in nature, without delving into conceptual knowledge. Perhaps they were more articulated with metatalk for this reason. In contrast, as part of a semester-long course based on a syllabus, the MICASE lectures were more theory-oriented. This was clearly illustrated in the concordance output which listed 44 instances of Let’s say to introduce a hypothetical statement, while the guest lectures had none. In this sense, the guest lectures could even be considered as a sort of ‘hybrid’ genre, having some characteristics of presentations, for example, a business presentation aiming to introduce and describe a company, product or service. The use of visual aids could also be examined more closely to investigate similarities between guest lectures and presentation genres. In fact, the more frequent references to upcoming visuals in the guest lectures compared with the MICASE lectures would seem to signal some affinity with presentations, where the visual channel makes a crucial contribution5 .

The higher frequency of phonologically reduced forms in the MICASE lectures also warrants further study. While this could be associated with both the language background of the speakers and mutual familiarity, it could also be a reflection of what is stereotypically considered ‘informal American style’. It would be interesting to analyze lecture corpora in American versus British versus other varieties of English to determine differences in formal versus casual language.

From a pedagogical viewpoint, this study begs the question of whether more interactive discourse structuring is linked to improved understanding also in L2 guest lecture settings. It would be worthwhile to set up studies with L2 guest lecture audiences to learn more about this aspect, through post-lecture testing to determine possible differences in comprehension and interviews with listeners to better understand how they respond to these metadiscursive features.

In terms of teaching methodology, the wide range of vocabulary found in the discourse structuring of all the speakers involved in this study points to lexis as an area needing more attention in lecture comprehension courses. Concordance output could be integrated into teaching materials to illustrate how many different verbs can be used to express a relatively limited number of concepts. More specifically, there are many variations on the basic themes of talk, do, and learn, which represent the essence of what happens, or at least should happen, during a lecture. Particularly among native speakers, these utterances can take on quite ‘non-traditional’ forms [e.g. examples (20–22)] and likely create problems for non-native speakers. Patterns with phrasal verbs (also notoriously problematic for L2 learners) should be pointed out (e.g. finish off/up, start off/ up/out, wind down/up, get to/back to/into). Another potential source of difficulty for non-native speakers are patterns that reflect the process of de-lexicalization, where the verb is actually semantically void. For example, a pattern such as let’s have a look, typical of lecture discourse, comprises one of the most common threeword lexical bundles (have a look) found in British English conversation (Biber et al., 1999). All of the above discourse structuring ‘previews’ can serve to consolidate a set of expectations among L2 lecture audiences and thus facilitate the listening process.

These findings can also find practical application in the preparation of prospective guest lecturers. Both L1 and L2 speakers can benefit from an enhanced awareness of the important function of interactive discourse structuring to guide L2 listeners. Particularly NS guest lecturers could be encouraged to use more interactive discourse structuring to facilitate L2 audiences. A pronounced use of discourse structuring may come less spontaneously to native speakers with respect to non-native speakers, who instead may use it often in response to both their listeners and their own needs. NS guest lecturers may find it useful to assess their vocabulary choices and the possible need to make adjustments for international audiences. On the other hand, NNS guest lecturers could be prompted to broaden their range of discourse structuring expressions and explore more informal communication styles. This type of self-evaluation can lead to a conscious effort to exploit interactive discourse structuring as a tool to aid comprehension, and thus ultimately contribute to more successful lecturing.

# Acknowledgements

This study was made possible by a Morley Scholarship for Studies in Second Language Learning and Teaching at the English Language Institute of the University of Michigan. My special thanks go to John M. Swales and Rita C. Simpson for their invaluable comments during the preparation of this article.

# Appendix A. Sample of concordance of We will/we’ll $^ +$ main verb from the guest lecture corpus

N Concordance

1 and uh that’s an important issue and uh   
2 found and what we’ll come to later on   
3 And later on what we found and what   
4 to see what’s happened in Spain and   
5 u one that we have in Spain and then   
6 ial cycle OK Right So tomorrow   
7 rive it from this And in the case study   
8 study. . .case studies. . .and then   
9 ribution of activity on the territory then   
10 rms really really small so at this point   
11 I think you’ve got. . .And things Erm   
12 at is said pick out the issues and then   
13 r that reason I suppose I will have time   
14 dout that I gave you before uh uh: so   
15 y you’ll be European in a few time so   
16 data sets which explain all about them   
18 asis on services and and the city Uh:   
19 after seeing other opinions- a lot eh?   
20 not here what’s happened here huh?   
21 ook at small firms But in a way which   
22 petitiveok? because they cooperate   
23 es in favour of horizontal measures (.)   
24 ompetitive of it for it ok? so tomorrow   
25 nt to be proved we have 39 a lot huh?

we’ll come back to that in a minute we’ll come to that high tech firms ar we’ll come to later on we’ll come to t we will decide if in Spain we have a we will define finally what in Spain we’ll do a case study ((Student)). . we will face today I show you one typ we’ll finish off by looking at govern we’ll go further after proving that e:r we’ll go specifically to the topic of we’ll have a break at this point How we’ll have a report back session to th we’ll talk about what UK industrial p we’ll just carry on as we where whe we’ll know more about these countr we’ll look at those you’ll get you’ll g we’ll say something later on but it’s we’ll say well we’re interested at lea We will see later more clearly don’t we’ll see in a moment it’s not been pa we will see later perhaps they e chan We’ll see in a moment what this mea we will see what determines location we’ll see then a map a beautiful map

# Appendix B. Verbs used in discourse structuring patterns in the two corpora

Address come to discover   
analyze compare discuss   
ask conclude do   
attempt continue draw cover   
begin cut emphasize   
build on examine decide explain   
carry on define explore   
check develop   
come back

Appendix B. (continued)

<html><body><table><tr><td>face</td><td>list</td><td>share</td></tr><tr><td>find</td><td>look</td><td>shift</td></tr><tr><td>finish</td><td></td><td>show</td></tr><tr><td>focus</td><td>make</td><td>skip solve</td></tr><tr><td>get into</td><td>mention move</td><td>spend</td></tr><tr><td>get through</td><td>move into</td><td>start</td></tr><tr><td>get to</td><td>move on</td><td>step back</td></tr><tr><td>give</td><td></td><td>stop</td></tr><tr><td>go back</td><td>notice</td><td>study</td></tr><tr><td>go further</td><td></td><td>suggest</td></tr><tr><td>go on</td><td>overlap</td><td>sum up</td></tr><tr><td>go over go through</td><td></td><td>summarize</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>pick up present</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>have</td><td></td><td>take</td></tr><tr><td>highlight</td><td>put</td><td>take up</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>talk about</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">introduce</td><td>read</td><td>tell</td></tr><tr><td>realize</td><td>touch on</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">jump</td><td>recap</td><td>try</td></tr><tr><td>reconvene refer</td><td>use</td></tr><tr><td>keep</td><td>repeat</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>know</td><td></td><td>wrap up</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>say</td><td>write</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>leave</td><td>see</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). Longman grammar of spoken and written English. Essex: Longman.   
Chafe, W. (1985). Linguistic differences produced by differences between speaking and writing. In D. Olsen, N. Torrence, & A. Hildyard (Eds.), Literacy, language and learning (pp. 105–123). Cambridge: CUP.   
Chaudron, C., & Richards, J. C. (1986). The effect of discourse markers on the comprehension of lectures. Applied Linguistics, 7, 113–127.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2002). Discourse structuring in academic lectures to linguistically diverse and unfamiliar audiences. In P. Evangelisti, & E. Ventola (Eds.), Textus, XV, English in academic settings: techniques of description/pedagogical applications (pp. 265–278). Genoa: Tilgher.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2003). Interacting with the audience: modality in business lectures delivered in a cross-cultural context. In R. Facchinetti (Ed.) English modality in perspective. Genre analysis and contrastive studies. Frankfurt am main: Peter Lang, pp. 27–43.   
DeCarrico, J., & Nattinger, J. R. (1988). Lexical phrases for the comprehension of academic lectures. English for Specific Purposes, 7, 91–102.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1994). Variation of the discourse patterns favoured by different disciplines and their pedagogical implications. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening (pp. 146–158). Cambridge: CUP.   
Flowerdew, J. (1994). Academic listening. Cambridge: CUP.   
Fortanet, I. The use of ‘‘we’’ in university lectures: a reconsideration. English for Specific Purposes, (in press).   
Goffman, E. (1981). Forms of talk. Oxford: Basil Blackwell.   
Khuwaileh, A. A. (1999). The role of chunks, phrases and body language in understanding co-ordinated academic lectures. System, 27, 249–260.   
Mauranen, A. (2001). Reflexive academic talk: observations from MICASE. In R. S. Simpson, & J. M. Swales (Eds.), Corpus linguistics in North America—selections from the 1999 symposium (pp. 165– 178). Ann Arbor: The University of Michigan Press.   
Olsen, L. A., & Huckin, T. N. (1990). Point-driven understanding in engineering lecture comprehension. English for Specific Purposes, 9, 33–47.   
Rilling, S. (1996). Lexical phrases as organizational markers in academic lectures: a corpus- and computer- based approach to research and teaching. The ORTESOL Journal, 17, 19–40.   
Rounds, P. L. (1987). Multifunctional personal pronoun use in an educational setting. English for Specific Purposes, 6, 13–29.   
Rowley-Jolivet, E. (2002). Visual discourse in scientific conference papers: a genre-based study. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 19–40.   
Scott, M. (1998). Wordsmith tools, Oxford University Press (version 3.0).   
Simpson, R., Briggs, S., Ovens, J., & Swales, J. M. (1999). The Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English. Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan (http://www.hti.umich.edu/m/ micase.   
Swales, J. M. Research genres: explorations and applications. Cambridge: CUP (in preparation).   
Thompson, S. (1994). Frameworks and contexts: a genre-based approach to analyzing lecture introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 171–186.   
Tyler, A. E., Jeffries, A. A., & Davies, C. E. (1988). The effect of discourse structuring devices on listener perceptions of coherence in non-native university teacher’s spoken discourse. World Englishes, 7, 101– 110.   
Williams, J. (1992). Planning, discourse marking and the comprehensibility of international teaching assistants. TESOL Quarterly, 26, 693–711.   
Young, L. (1990). Language as behaviour, language as code. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.   
Young, L. (1994). University lectures—macro-structure and micro-features. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening (pp. 159–176). Cambridge: CUP.

Belinda Crawford Camiciottoli is an EAP/ESP lecturer at the University of Florence (Italy) Faculty of Economics. Her research interests are L2 reading instruction, modality, cross-cultural issues and spoken academic discourse. She has published in the Journal of Research in Reading and Reading in a Foreign Language.