# Children’s constructive climate change engagement: Empowering awareness, agency, and action

Carlie D. Trott

To cite this article: Carlie D. Trott (2020) Children’s constructive climate change engagement: Empowering awareness, agency, and action, Environmental Education Research, 26:4, 532-554, DOI: 10.1080/13504622.2019.1675594

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13504622.2019.1675594

# Children’s constructive climate change engagement: Empowering awareness, agency, and action

Carlie D. Trott ir

Department of Psychology, University of Cincinnati, Cincinnati, OH, USA

# ABSTRACT

This mixed-methods study examined how ten- to twelve-year-old children experienced and made sense of their growing climate change awareness through an after-school program that used participatory methods to facilitate children’s informed climate change action. The fifteen-week program combined hands-on educational activities with digital photography and culminated in youth-led action projects focused on individual (i.e. daily habits) and collaborative change (i.e. community projects). After the program, children knew significantly more about the scientific and social dimensions of climate change than before, and more than the average U.S. teen or adult. Survey and focus group analyses showed that, in addition to learning, children were inspired and motivated by their growing climate change awareness. Children felt empowered by their knowledge and eager to learn more and take action to minimize harms. Towards theorizing children’s constructive climate change engagement, the importance of informal learning environments for children’s intergenerational and political influence is discussed.

# ARTICLE HISTORY

Received 28 February 2019   
Accepted 16 September 2019

# KEYWORDS

Agency; awareness; children; climate change education; hope; participatory action research; sustainability; youth

As climate change intensifies around the globe, education is increasingly recognized among the most critical needs underlying societal transformation to sustainability (Busch, Henderson, and Stevenson 2018; Ledley, Rooney-Varga, and Niepold 2017). Despite – or perhaps because of – this recognition, critical questions remain about ‘how best’ to deliver climate change education, with whom, and to what end (Kenis and Mathijs 2012; Waldron et al. 2016). To date, the most common setting for U.S. climate change education is the formal science classroom and the most likely audience is adolescents and older youth, particularly in high school or college (Monroe et al. 2017). Beyond school settings, efforts to advance climate change public engagement tend to focus on the voting public: adults (Wibeck 2014). Inside and outside the classroom, opportunities to learn about and take action on climate change are less available to children (Monroe et al. 2017).

Complementary arguments exist in support of children’s increased climate change engagement. First, children’s engagement has been framed as a moral obligation – that children, as key stakeholders, have a right to be informed and engaged in issues that will impact their lives (Chawla and Heft 2002; Hicks and Holden 2007; Page 2007). Furthermore, children’s engagement has been advocated as a pragmatic course of action – that it is necessary to prepare children for future realities and their inevitable role as tomorrow’s leaders in addressing climate change (Ballantyne, Connell, and Fien 1998; see also Ojala 2012; Koger 2013; Schreiner, Henriksen, and

Kirkeby Hansen 2005). However, given that climate change – a phenomenon increasingly described in terms of crisis and chaos – can be distressing to think about (Verlie 2019), there is a need to cultivate empowering learning environments that support children’s awareness while inspiring their sustained interest and engagement (Trott 2019; D’Amato and Krasny 2011; Li and Monroe 2017).

This article is part of a series of manuscripts examining what constitutes, and how to facilitate, children’s constructive climate change engagement by using methodologies that allow for simultaneously exploring and advancing children’s role as informed agents of change in their families and communities. Towards theorizing and enabling children’s constructive engagement, it is important to examine not only what effectively supports children’s climate change learning, but also how children experience their awareness. This mixed-methods study used surveys and focus groups to explore the antecedents and impacts of children’s climate change awareness in the context of an after-school program that combined hands-on educational activities with digital photography and culminated in youth-led action projects. In addition to assessing children’s program-based knowledge gains, analyses explore how ten- to twelve-year-old children perceived climate change before and after the program as well as how they reflected upon their growing climate change awareness.

# Children’s climate change awareness: the U.S. context

U.S. public support for climate change education is widespread. In 2018, $7 9 \%$ of U.S. adults agreed that schools should teach about the causes, consequences, and potential solutions to global warming (Marlon et al. 2018). Despite this, climate change is often neglected, misrepresented, or under-emphasized in the U.S. classroom. A recent nationally representative study found that most middle and high school science teachers considered themselves inadequately trained to teach about climate change, and – perhaps consequently – spent little time on the subject (i.e. approximately one to two hours) and often sent ‘mixed messages’ through their teaching (e.g. regarding the soundness of the science; Plutzer et al. 2016). Likely due to existing educational policies (Wise 2010) as well as beliefs around what is age appropriate (Durand and Lykes 2006), a recent review of climate change educational interventions found that the youngest students (i.e. grades 3–5) were the least often engaged (Monroe et al. 2017).

Outside the formal classroom, children are regularly confronted with images and information about environmental catastrophes including climate change through, for example, kids’ nature magazines, movies and television, zoo trips, and news headlines (Kelsey and Armstrong 2012). The most popular sources of climate change information for teens, beyond schoolteachers, are websites and television, and when they develop specific questions about climate change, teens often turn first to the Internet before asking a teacher (Leiserowitz, Smith, and Marlon 2011). Studies with children and adolescents indicate that climate change can be a source of anxiety and pessimism about the future of the planet (Kelsey and Armstrong 2012; Ojala 2012; Taber and Taylor 2009). To manage these negative feelings, children engage in coping strategies to distance themselves psychologically from the issue, for example, through distraction (i.e. thinking about, or doing something comforting) or avoidance (e.g. turning off the TV; leaving the room; Ojala 2012).

In the United States, where climate change is not a universally required component of the curriculum, many teachers are left without a mandate or adequate resources for its inclusion (Wise 2010), and children are often left without a supportive and structured environment for finding answers to their questions. Children’s uncertainties and anxieties may be exacerbated by hearing about climate change threats without more substantive ways to engage (Barrows 1998; Jensen and Schnack 1997). Recognizing that children’s climate change awareness often already exists – however incomplete – there is a need to develop methods that support children’s knowledge, while offering empowering and constructive ways to engage with the issue.

# Climate change education: a brief review

The majority studies on climate change education examine the impact of educational programming on learners’ factual knowledge (Fisher 2016; Monroe et al. 2017). Taking place most commonly with students in middle school and above, this extensive body of research has examined pedagogical strategies, students’ content-related (mis)conceptions, and learning outcomes related to a number of topics, namely: the climate system, including the carbon cycle and the greenhouse effect, human impacts on climate change, ecological consequences of climate change, and climate change mitigation and adaptation strategies (Bofferding and Kloser 2015; Dawson 2015; Niebert and Gropengießer 2014; Porter, Weaver, and Raptis 2012; Pruneauet al. 2003; Shepardson et al. 2009, 2014; Visintainer and Linn 2015). Less often, the impact of climate change educational interventions is assessed in terms of learners’ attitude or behavior change (Monroe et al. 2017).

Given the multidimensional nature of climate change as a social, environmental, and political issue as well as a scientific phenomenon, a common criticism of the traditional ‘science-oriented’ approach to climate change education has been that, while it may deepen students’ comprehension of the mechanics of the problem and its solutions, it does not support students’ sense of action competence or, more broadly, facilitate social change (Jensen and Schnack 1997; Waldron et al. 2016). In their recent review, Monroe et al. (2017, 2) made a distinction between ‘just the facts’ and ‘also the action’ approaches to climate change education and concluded that, for a number of reasons (e.g. climate change politicization), fact-focused approaches remain prevalent. Recognizing that knowledge alone is insufficient to inspire learners’ sustained engagement, researchers have articulated the need for climate change educational approaches that facilitate learners’ sense of agency and provide opportunities action (Chawla and Cushing 2007; Dittmer et al. 2018; Pruneau et al. 2003; Walsh and Cordero 2019). Furthermore, given a lack of focus on younger students (e.g. primary school age), there is a particular need to explore constructive learning environments for children (Trott 2019).

# Children’s constructive climate change engagement

Research exploring children’s engagement with socio-scientific issues1 (SSIs) has demonstrated that primary school students are willing and able to meaningfully participate in purposeful science-based discussions around complex, real-world issues (Sadler, Barab, and Scott 2007), including climate change (Trott 2019; Karpudewan, Roth, and Abdullah 2015). In one study, loosely guided deliberative discussions allowed fifth graders to correct their own misperceptions about climate change and to draw more reasoned conclusions through social interaction (Mason and Santi 1998). In another study, nine- and ten-year-olds were able to discuss climate change by positioning themselves as active contributors to society, using their life experiences and limited knowledge to consider how climate change impacts their everyday lives (Byrne et al. 2014). As these and other studies illustrate, climate change learning can be supported by students’ personal connection to the issue (e.g. understanding local impacts) as well as their active engagement throughout the learning process (Monroe et al. 2017).

Efforts to engage children constructively must recognize that climate change, unlike basic physics or chemistry, can be unsettling to fully grasp, and because of this, comprehension alone may not empower learners (Trott 2019). Rather, it is important to acknowledge children’s emotions (Ojala 2016), attend to their sense of agency (Walsh and Cordero 2019), encourage children to envision alternative futures (Hicks 2014), and towards this end, provide examples of (ideally local) practices and projects that serve to address the problem (Li and Monroe 2017). Moreover, rather than teaching climate change as a set of facts, children’s constructive engagement can be strengthened through active dialogue allowing children to explore and develop their own objectives and plans for action (Wals et al. 2008). Finally, providing children with opportunities to ‘concretely work together for change,’ for example through youth-led community action projects, can serve to cultivate their sense of hope (Ojala 2017, 82).

To date, research on children’s climate change engagement suggests that children, if given the chance, can meaningfully and positively engage with the subject matter through discussion and deliberation, yet few opportunities exist for their informed action on learned concepts (Chawla and Cushing 2007; Haynes and Tanner 2015). Moreover, climate change education research commonly evaluates children’s program-based knowledge gains, but rarely explores how climate change awareness reciprocally affects children (Monroe et al. 2017). Towards theorizing and enabling children’s constructive climate change engagement, this study examined how ten- to twelve-year-olds experienced and made sense of their growing climate change awareness through an after-school program that facilitated individual and collaborative climate change action.

# The present study

In the present study, children’s constructive climate change engagement is conceptualized as that which aims to simultaneously advance children’s awareness, agency, and action (Trott 2019). Put differently, constructive engagement involves advancing children’s knowledge, while inspiring their hope in the future by enacting sustainability in the present. Critically, children’s constructive engagement enables children to envision alternatives and to believe they can be agents of transformative change. To ‘construct’ means to create or to form, and to be ‘constructive’ means having ‘a useful or beneficial purpose’ (Oxford Dictionaries 2019a). Children’s constructive climate change engagement, as conceived in this research, can be beneficial both to children and to society over the short term (e.g. via informed citizenship) as well as over the long term, towards achieving societal transformation to sustainability (Busch, Henderson, and Stevenson 2018; Ledley, Rooney-Varga, and Niepold 2017).

This article is part of a series of manuscripts examining children’s constructive climate change engagement through the lens of an after-school program that used participatory methods to encourage children’s climate change awareness, agency, and action. The first article documented the value of integrating transformative sustainability pedagogy with arts-based and participatory methodologies for facilitating children’s enjoyment and agentic action in climate change educational contexts (Trott 2019). This mixed-methods study combined survey and focus group methods to explore how, over the course of a fifteen-week after-school program, children experienced and made sense of their growing climate change awareness. In this study, children’s ‘awareness’ – rather than referring to knowledge alone – is defined as children’s general perceptions and specific knowledge about climate change, as well as their familiarity with climate change as a problem or issue to be addressed.

Towards developing methods that cultivate children’s constructive engagement, this study addresses the following research questions:

1. What were children’s perceptions of climate change before and after the program?   
2. How did the program impact children’s climate change knowledge?   
3. How did children experience their growing climate change awareness?

# Methods

# Community partner and participants

This study took place in partnership with three Boys and Girls Clubs (BGC) in the Mountain Western U.S.2 Participants were 55 children ages 10–12 $( 5 2 . 7 \%$ girls) who were in fourth to seventh grade and attended 18 different primary $( 6 1 . 8 \% )$ and middle schools $( 3 8 . 2 \% )$ in the region.

Table 1. Program overview: Science, camera, action! (SCA).   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Topic</td><td>Week</td><td>Activity</td></tr><tr><td>Introduction</td><td>1</td><td>Gallery walk</td></tr><tr><td>Science: educational activities</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Ecosystems</td><td>2</td><td>Weaving the web</td></tr><tr><td>2. Climate vs. weather</td><td>3</td><td>Climate and weather with skittles</td></tr><tr><td>3. The greenhouse effect.</td><td>5</td><td>Greenhouse gas tag</td></tr><tr><td>4. Climate change &amp; ecosystems</td><td>6</td><td>Oh Deer! &amp; Glaciers: then and now</td></tr><tr><td>5. Sustainable solutions #1: energy &amp; waste.</td><td>8</td><td>Energy bingo and carbon footprints</td></tr><tr><td>6. Sustainable solutions #2: teamwork &amp; leadership</td><td>9</td><td>Young Voices for the Planet videos</td></tr><tr><td>Camera: photovoice process</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Topics 1-2</td><td>4</td><td>Photovoice: ecosystems and climate</td></tr><tr><td>Topics 3-4</td><td>7</td><td>Photovoice: climate change - process and impacts</td></tr><tr><td>Topics 5-6</td><td>10</td><td>Photovoice: individual and collaborative action.</td></tr><tr><td>Action: Youth-led Projects.</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td> Individual action (all sites).</td><td>8-13</td><td>Family action planse</td></tr><tr><td>Collaborative actione</td><td>11-15</td><td>Community action projects.</td></tr><tr><td>Site 1: Policy advocacy and local action</td><td></td><td>City council presentation and tree-planting campaign.</td></tr><tr><td>Site 2: Community advocacy</td><td></td><td>Photovoice gallery exhibition and program website.</td></tr><tr><td>Site 3: Community action</td><td></td><td>Community garden</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Each pair of educational activities was followed by a monthly photovoice session consisting of photo-printing and discussion. Photovoice sessions informed youth-led action projects. In this way, SCA’s Science component was a platform for its Camera component, and both components provided a platform for youth-led Action.

Group sizes varied across BGC sites – with 9 in the most rural area, 19 in the most populous, and 27 in the most suburban. Participants were $5 6 . 4 \%$ white, $2 5 . 4 \%$ Hispanic/Latinx, $1 4 . 6 \%$ biracial or multiple ethnicities, and $3 . 6 \%$ Asian/Pacific Islander. Most children $( 6 1 . 8 \% )$ were from low-income households. Approval for this study was obtained by the institutional review board of the research university, and parental consent and youth assent were obtained for all participants. Children’s participation was voluntary and, on average, children attended between 11 and 12 weeks $M = 1 1 . 3 )$ of the fifteen-week program.

# Program content

Science, Camera, Action! (SCA) was an after-school program, designed by the author, that combined hands-on climate change educational activities with photovoice methodology to empower children as change agents for sustainability within their families and communities through individual and collaborative action (Table 1). SCA integrated transformative sustainability pedagogy with arts-based and participatory methodologies (Sipos, Battisti, and Grimm 2008; Wang et al. 2004). Below, SCA’s primary program components – education, photography, and action – are described in brief. More detailed descriptions of each program component are provided in the first manuscript in this series (see Trott 2019). SCA took place for one hour weekly between January and May 2016.

# Science: exploring the problem and solutions through educational activities

The educational program content of SCA was made up of six hands-on, hour-long activities compiled from freely available climate change educational resources online (Table 1; for full activity descriptions, see Trott 2017). As a set, the activities told a story about the connections between Earth’s changing climate, local ecosystems, and the individual and collective actions of humans. Specifically, the activities were intended to make climate change concepts tangible, visible, and relatable. Despite its title, SCA’s ‘Science’ component incorporated both the scientific and the social dimensions of climate change, while exploring both the problem and its solutions across multiple dimensions and scales.

# Camera: making personal and place-based connections through photography

Photovoice methodology – SCA’s ‘Camera’ component – bridged educational activities (i.e. ‘Science’) with children’s action projects (i.e. ‘Action’; Cook 2015). Following each hands-on activity, children used program-provided digital cameras to capture images conveying their thoughts about, and connections with program topics. For example, after role-playing Rocky Mountain wildlife in search of scarce habitat components following locally familiar disasters (e.g. wildfires, floods), children were given a handout with the following prompt:

“This week, we thought about how changes to Earth’s climate can also change ecosystems. How does this relate to where you live? What does this make you think about? How does it make you feel? Take a few photos of these ideas.”

Once per month, children printed, titled, and discussed their photographs in small groups. Later, these stories and photographs served as inspiration for youth-led community action projects.

# Action: enacting sustainable alternatives through youth-led projects

During the ‘Action’ component of SCA, children: (1) developed family action plans, in response to personalized carbon footprint feedback, to advance everyday sustainable actions at the household level (e.g. daily habits minimizing energy use); and (2) designed and implemented a larger community action project, employing community advocacy and action to advance sustainability in local settings. To determine the focus of community action projects, children engaged in open-ended discussions and a consensus process shaped by practical limitations placed on project design (e.g. $\$ 500$ budget) and implementation (e.g. five-week duration). Children’s community action projects are listed in Table 1 (for a more detailed description of each project, see Trott 2019).

# Data sources and analysis procedures

This mixed-methods study used a combination of surveys and focus groups to address research questions. The survey, administered before and after the program, included two items to gauge children’s general perceptions about climate change and 11 items to assess their specific climate change knowledge, including children’s understanding of Earth’s climate system, the causes and consequences of climate change, and actions to address climate change (Leiserowitz, Smith, and Marlon 2011). Two open-ended post-program survey items explored aspects of children’s growing climate change awareness, specifically: (1) how children thought about the impact of climate change on their lives; and (2) whether and how children believed they could make a difference in the world. Following the program, eleven focus groups (four to five children each; $M = 3 8$ minutes) explored children’s thoughts and feelings about climate change before and after their program participation. Focus group discussions were audio-recorded, transcribed verbatim, and edited prior to analysis using NVivo 10 software. Transcriptions and open-ended survey items were analyzed according to thematic analysis (Braun and Clarke 2006). In reporting qualitative findings, pseudonyms are used in place of children’s names.

# Results

Results are divided into three major sections corresponding with this study’s research questions. Within each section, survey results are followed by focus group findings. Qualitative findings, beyond providing unique information in response to research questions, often serve to clarify and expand on survey results.

Table 2. Summary of paired-sample t tests for children’s climate change perceptions and knowledge.   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td>Pre</td><td>Post</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>95% CI</td><td>Cohen&#x27;s</td></tr><tr><td>Variable</td><td>M (SD)</td><td>M (SD)</td><td>MD</td><td>t</td><td>df</td><td>p</td><td>LL</td><td>UL</td><td>d</td></tr><tr><td>Certainty about climate changea</td><td>2.80 (1.43)</td><td>3.71 (1.26)</td><td>+0.91</td><td>3.77</td><td>54</td><td>&lt;.001***</td><td>0.43</td><td>1.39</td><td>0.51</td></tr><tr><td>Thoughts about climate changeb</td><td>4.54 (0.57)</td><td>4.78 (0.42)</td><td>+0.24</td><td>2.89</td><td>53</td><td>.006**</td><td>0.39</td><td>0.07</td><td>0.41</td></tr><tr><td>Climate change knowledge assessmentc</td><td>60.71 (11.32)</td><td>68.70 (14.84)</td><td>+7.98</td><td>4.55</td><td>54</td><td>&lt;.001***</td><td>4.47</td><td>11.50</td><td>0.61</td></tr></table></body></html>

a Response range: 1–4. b Response range: 1–5. c Response range: $0 { - } 1 0 0 \%$ correct responses.

# Children’s perceptions of climate change

This study’s first research question aimed to explore children’s general perceptions of climate change before and after their program participation. As a dimension of children’s climate change awareness, ‘perception’ refers to: (1) children’s ‘ability to see, hear, or become aware of [climate change] through the senses,’ as well as (2) ‘the way in which [climate change] is regarded, understood, or interpreted’ (Oxford Dictionaries 2019b). Although climate change – as a phenomenon measured in thirty-year averages – is notoriously imperceptible through human sensory inputs, perceptions here refer to children’s general thoughts and beliefs about climate change as an environmental and/or social issue as well as the sources of these perceptions.

Survey Results. Two survey items examined children’s general perceptions about climate change before and after the program. The first question asked children to respond, on a 4-point Likert scale ranging from 1 (‘Definitely False’) to 4 (‘Definitely True’), whether ‘Earth’s climate is changing now’. Before the program, just two participants indicated that they thought this statement was ‘Probably False’ and zero thought it was ‘Definitely False’. Among those who believed this statement to be true, 21 $( 3 8 . 2 \% )$ said ‘Probably’ and 31 $( 5 6 . 4 \% )$ said ‘Definitely’. After the program, all children felt that this statement was true to some extent, with 12 $( 2 1 . 8 \% )$ indicating ‘Probably’ and 42 $( 7 6 . 4 \% )$ indicating that Earth’s climate is ‘Definitely’ changing now. Of the 54 participants responding to this item at both pre and post, 16 participants $( 2 9 . 6 \% )$ became more certain that climate change is happening now, and 4 participants $( 7 . 4 \% )$ became less certain. However, most participants $\left( n = 3 4 ; 6 3 \% \right)$ did not change their response over time.

A second question asked participants ‘How much [they had] thought about climate change before today.’ Likert scale responses ranged from 1 (‘Not at all’) to 5 (‘A lot’). After the program, fewer than 1 in 5 children $( 1 8 . 2 \% )$ thought about climate change ‘Not at all’ or ‘Not a lot,’ compared to $5 2 . 7 \%$ in the presurvey. Of 55 participants, 31 $( 5 6 . 4 \% )$ reported thinking more about climate change after the program than before, 11 $( 2 0 \% )$ less, and 13 $( 2 3 . 6 \% )$ the same amount.

Dependent samples $t$ tests were performed to assess differences in children’s general perceptions of climate change before and after the program. There were no extreme values identified for either item, as assessed by inspection of a boxplot, and all cases were retained in the analyses. Difference scores for each item were normally distributed, as assessed by visual inspection of a Normal Q–Q Plot and by examining skewness and kurtosis. Children’s certainty and time spent thinking about climate change both showed statistically significant mean increases following SCA. The results are summarized in Table 2.

Focus Group Findings. To explore the context and reasons for children’s perceptions about climate change, a portion of the focus group guide was dedicated to exploring children’s perspectives on, and sources of information about climate change prior to their participation in the program. When asked whether they had heard of global warming or climate change before the program, several mostly younger participants reported having had no knowledge of climate

change, such as Lucy, age 10, who said, ‘I didn’t know about climate change before the program.   
At all.’ Others reported having only heard the phrase.

Before the program I didn’t really know much at all about climate change. I just knew that there was something called climate change. – Arie (10)

I didn’t really know what climate change was. I just heard it a few times and I had no idea. – Ben (10)

Prior knowledge varied widely, however. When asked to think back and describe what came to mind when they thought about climate change before the program, several older children provided mostly accurate information about climate change impacts.

I thought [climate change] was how the sun was melting glaciers and stuff in Antarctica. Yeah. How the sun was melting the glaciers, and … the sea level would rise. – Katherine (12)

I thought about global warming and how it’s hurting a whole bunch of different animals and how if we don’t stop, it’s going to end up killing our whole ecosystem. – Abigail (12)

Children from each research site reported having learned about climate change to some extent in school, though their exposure varied by school and by grade level. For example, older participants more often than younger participants reported school-based climate change learning, such as Abigail, age 12, who ‘heard about it in science and geography’ classes.

Beyond school, participants reported having heard about climate change on television, in the news, from books, and through field trips and family visits to museums and zoos. The following statements represent sources of climate change information or awareness by children from each of the three research sites:

It’s just everywhere I go. I always see posters … about climate change. – Nora (12)

I learned it through books. I knew that migration patterns were changing, and plants were blooming earlier. – Ali (12)

I have known about climate change because … my mom likes watching the news in the morning. My grandma likes watching the news in the morning. I’ve heard a lot about it in my life, but I never knew how serious it could be. Ever. – Bill (12)

A theme among younger participants was that hearing about climate change made them curious to know more. Ten-year-old Noah, who ‘didn’t think about [climate change] that much,’ nevertheless had a feeling that ‘it was important to know about.’ As others described:

I had a lot of questions about it, but I heard about it a lot on the news, because that was like the big thing on the news whenever it came on. – Cecelia (10)

I saw it on the news and I kind of paid attention to it, then I stopped paying attention to it. I heard about it and I started researching it and then I stopped. – Jimmy (10)

# Children’s climate change knowledge

This study’s second research question aimed to assess how the program impacted children’s climate change knowledge. As a dimension of children’s climate change awareness, ‘knowledge’ refers to: (1) ‘facts, information, and skills acquired through experience or education,’ as well as (2) ‘the theoretical or practical understanding of a subject’ (Oxford Dictionaries 2019c). Children’s specific knowledge and general perceptions of climate change together comprise children’s climate change awareness.

Survey Results. Before and after SCA, 11 items were used to assess children’s knowledge of the scientific and social dimensions of climate change (Table 3). Five were true/false items (e.g. ‘Climate means average weather conditions in a region’, True); four were multiple choice questions with a single correct answer (e.g. ‘Which country produces the most greenhouse gases per person?’, The United States), and two were multiple choice questions with multiple correct and incorrect answers (e.g. ‘Which of the following are fossil fuels?’, Coal, Oil, and Natural Gas [not Wood, Solar, or Nuclear]). Due to items with multiple correct and incorrect answers, the maximum possible score on the knowledge assessment was 23 points. A paired-samples t test was used to determine whether the mean increase in children’s climate change, knowledge following the program, significantly differed from zero. Two outliers were detected through examination of a boxplot. Inspection of their values did not reveal them to be extreme and they were retained in the analysis. The differences in climate change knowledge before and after the program were normally distributed, as assessed by visual inspection of a Normal Q–Q Plot. Difference scores were also determined to be normally distributed by examining skewness and kurtosis. This paired-samples t test showed a statistically significant mean increase in children’s climate change knowledge following their program participation (Table 2).

Table 3. Children’s climate change knowledge assessment.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2">Knowledge items (correct response)</td><td colspan="2"> Pre-survey</td><td colspan="2">Post-survey</td><td rowspan="2"></td><td rowspan="2">% Change</td></tr><tr><td># Correct</td><td>%</td><td># Correct</td><td>%</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">True/false:</td></tr><tr><td>Climate means average weather conditions in a region. (T)</td><td>48</td><td>81.36</td><td>53</td><td>96.36</td><td>+</td><td>15.01</td></tr><tr><td>Climate and weather mean pretty much the same thing. (F)</td><td>25</td><td>42.37</td><td>24</td><td>43.64</td><td>+</td><td>1.26</td></tr><tr><td>The Earth&#x27;s climate has been pretty much the same for millions of years. (F)</td><td>37</td><td>62.71</td><td>34</td><td>61.82</td><td>-</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><td>Climate change will cause some places to get wetter, whereas others will get drier. (T)</td><td>53</td><td>89.83</td><td>55</td><td>100.00</td><td>+</td><td>10.17</td></tr><tr><td>Climate change will make weather hotter by the same amount in all countries. (F)</td><td>32</td><td>54.24</td><td>27</td><td>49.09</td><td></td><td>5.15</td></tr><tr><td>Multiple choice (single answer): The &#x27;greenhouse effect&#x27; refers to: (Gases in the</td><td>34</td><td>57.63</td><td>41</td><td>74.55</td><td>+</td><td>16.92</td></tr><tr><td>atmosphere that trap heat) Which one is a greenhouse gas?</td><td>27</td><td>45.76</td><td>44</td><td>80.00</td><td>+</td><td>34.24</td></tr><tr><td>(Carbon dioxide) Which country produces the most greenhouse</td><td>30</td><td>50.85</td><td>27</td><td>49.09</td><td></td><td>1.76</td></tr><tr><td>gases per person? (The United States) Which one of the following do you think</td><td>10</td><td>16.95</td><td>19</td><td>34.55</td><td>+</td><td>17.60</td></tr><tr><td>contributes the most to climate change? (Burning fossil fuels for heat and electricity) Multiple choice (multiple answer):</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">Which of the following are &#x27;fossil fuels&#x27;? (*)</td></tr><tr><td>Coal*</td><td>39</td><td>63.84 66.10</td><td>43</td><td>73.03 78.18</td><td>+ +</td><td>9.19 12.08</td></tr><tr><td>Oil*</td><td>41</td><td>69.49</td><td>40</td><td>72.73</td><td>+</td><td>3.24</td></tr><tr><td>Natural Gas*</td><td>40</td><td>67.80</td><td>41</td><td>74.55</td><td>+</td><td>6.75</td></tr><tr><td>Solar</td><td>36</td><td>61.02</td><td>41</td><td>74.55</td><td>+</td><td>13.53</td></tr><tr><td> Nuclear</td><td>31</td><td>52.54</td><td>35</td><td>63.64</td><td>+</td><td>11.09</td></tr><tr><td>Wood</td><td></td><td></td><td>41</td><td>74.55</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Which of the following actions can people</td><td>39</td><td>66.10 62.71</td><td></td><td>69.55</td><td>+ +</td><td>8.44 6.83</td></tr><tr><td colspan="7">take to help reduce climate change? (*)</td></tr><tr><td>Walk or bicycle instead of drive*</td><td>53</td><td>89.83</td><td>47</td><td>85.45</td><td></td><td>4.38</td></tr><tr><td>Unplug TVs and computers when not in use*</td><td>35</td><td>59.32</td><td>39</td><td>70.91</td><td>+</td><td>11.59</td></tr><tr><td>Turn off the lights when leaving a room*</td><td>44</td><td>74.58</td><td>41</td><td>74.55</td><td></td><td>0.03</td></tr><tr><td>Turn off the tap while brushing teeth*</td><td>44</td><td>74.58</td><td>43</td><td>78.18</td><td>+</td><td>3.61</td></tr><tr><td>Eat less meat*</td><td>21</td><td>35.59</td><td>29</td><td>52.73</td><td>+</td><td>17.13</td></tr><tr><td>Take a bath instead of a shower</td><td>37</td><td>62.71</td><td>34</td><td>61.82</td><td>-</td><td>0.89</td></tr><tr><td>Stop using aerosol spray cans</td><td>20</td><td>33.90</td><td>31</td><td>56.36</td><td>+</td><td>22.47</td></tr><tr><td>Fly instead of drive.</td><td>42</td><td>71.19</td><td>42</td><td>76.36</td><td>+</td><td>5.18</td></tr><tr><td>Total</td><td></td><td>60.71</td><td></td><td>68.70</td><td>+</td><td>7.98</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. Order of items and multiple-choice responses were altered between pre- and post-surveys. Total percentage correct was calculated by dividing the total number of correct responses by 23 (the maximum number of correct responses). Correct responses to each item are provided in parentheses above.

Items used in this study were selected from a report, published by the Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, comparing the average climate change knowledge of U.S. teens (age, 13–17 years) with that of adults (Leiserowitz, Smith, and Marlon 2011). Fifteen scored items from the knowledge assessment were available for direct comparison between the children in this study, U.S. teens, and U.S. adults. Following their program participation, on average and across all items, $6 8 \%$ of SCA children responded correctly to climate change knowledge questions, compared to 56 and $5 9 \%$ of U.S. teens and adults, respectively. Prior to SCA, the average proportion of children providing correct responses to these items was $2 \%$ higher and $1 \%$ lower than among U.S. teens and adults. After SCA, this proportion was 12 and $9 \%$ higher than among U.S. teens and adults, respectively – an increase of $1 0 \%$ above children’s preprogram knowledge. Individual item analyses are summarized in Table 4.

Focus group findings. While survey items assessed whether and to what extent children’s climate change knowledge grew following SCA, focus groups explored why and how. Several children said that what they learned in SCA built on what they had previously learned in school because it included more or different information. As Andrew, age 11, explained, ‘Since [we’re] not in middle school yet, [SCA] actually teaches you more about [climate change]’. Compared to school, SCA was perceived to cover the causes and consequences of climate change in greater depth.

[SCA] makes me think about [climate change] more because now I know that climate change has done more than what I just learned in class. – Daniel (10)

You learn way more [in SCA] than your school because sometimes the school doesn’t really talk about these [fossil fuel] resources that we’re using. And that they should stop using old resources. – James (11)

I don’t know how to put this, but I knew from class … that [climate change] was really bad and it wasn’t a good thing. But I didn’t exactly know why until this program and that just let me see why it’s bad and what it does. – Scarlett (12)

Like Scarlett, others explained that SCA expanded their knowledge about the extent of the problem, particularly regarding the intensity of climate change impacts. Irrespective of their prior knowledge, many participants explained that SCA deepened their understanding of ‘how bad’ climate change could be.

I knew that [climate change] could hurt the environment very badly … [but] I didn’t know that it could be very bad like what I learned here. – Cristy (11)

I learned just how bad global warming was. I knew that it was bad, but I didn’t know just how bad … Like, for one of the glaciers, there was a glacier and now there’s just a lake! – Ali (12)

Despite variation, a basic understanding of the social and scientific dimensions of climate change was demonstrated by children at each research site and by every age group. At times, grasping the human dimensions of climate change seemed to make the problem more concrete for children.

[Before the program], I didn’t really think about [climate change] actually. I just didn’t care for it, but after the program, I realized how it can affect the world just by glaciers melting and sea levels rising. Homes will be lost. – Sydney (12)

# Children’s growing climate change awareness

This study’s final research question aimed to explore how children experienced their growing climate change awareness. Awareness is defined as: (1) ‘knowledge or perception of a situation or fact,’ as well as (2) ‘concern about and well-informed interest in a particular situation or development’ (Oxford Dictionaries 2019d). As such, these final questions explore children’s reflections on their learning experiences reported above as well as how children made sense of climate change in relation to their own lives.

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td colspan="3">Children&#x27;s knowledge (N= 55)</td><td colspan="3">U.S. Teens (N= 517) vs. SCA children</td><td colspan="3">U.S. adults (N= 1513) vs. SCA children</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>Pre-SCA</td><td>Post-SCA</td><td></td><td>U.S. teens</td><td>Children (pre). Vs.</td><td>Vs. Children (post)</td><td>U.S. adults</td><td>Vs. Children (pre).</td><td>Vs. Children (post).</td></tr><tr><td>True/false: Climate means average weather conditions in</td><td></td><td></td><td>% Change</td><td>68</td><td>% Diff. 13</td><td>28</td><td>74</td><td>% Diff. 7</td><td>% Diff. 22</td></tr><tr><td>a region. (T).</td><td>81</td><td>96</td><td>15</td><td></td><td>1</td><td>3</td><td>54</td><td>-12</td><td>-10</td></tr><tr><td>Climate and weather mean pretty much the same thing. (F).</td><td>42</td><td>44</td><td>1</td><td>41</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The Earth&#x27;s climate has been pretty much the same for millions of years. (F)</td><td>63</td><td>62</td><td>-1</td><td>59</td><td>4</td><td>3</td><td>67</td><td>-4</td><td>-5</td></tr><tr><td>Climate change will cause some places to get wetter, whereas others will get drier. (T) Climate change will make weather hotter by</td><td>90</td><td>100</td><td>10</td><td>54</td><td>36</td><td>46</td><td>68</td><td>22</td><td>32</td></tr><tr><td>the same amount in all countries. (T) Multiple choice (single answer):</td><td>54</td><td>49</td><td>-5</td><td>35</td><td>19</td><td>14</td><td>44</td><td>10</td><td>5</td></tr><tr><td>The &#x27;greenhouse effect&#x27; refers to: (gases in the atmosphere that trap heat)</td><td>58</td><td>75</td><td>17</td><td>77</td><td>-19</td><td>-2</td><td>66</td><td>-8</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Which one is a greenhouse gas? (carbon dioxide)e</td><td>46</td><td>80</td><td>34</td><td>71</td><td>-25</td><td>9</td><td>67</td><td>-21</td><td>13</td></tr><tr><td>Which country produces the most greenhouse gases per person? (The United States)</td><td>51</td><td>49</td><td>-2</td><td>39</td><td>12</td><td>10</td><td>42</td><td>9</td><td>7</td></tr><tr><td>Which one of the following do you think. contributes the most to climate change? (Burning fossil fuels for heat and</td><td>17</td><td>35</td><td>18</td><td>21</td><td>-4</td><td>14</td><td>25</td><td>-8</td><td>10</td></tr><tr><td>electricity) Multiple choice (multiple answer):</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Which of the following are &#x27;fossil fuels&#x27;? (*) Coal*</td><td>66</td><td>78</td><td>12</td><td>75</td><td>-9</td><td>3</td><td>80</td><td>-14</td><td>-2</td></tr><tr><td>Oil*</td><td>69</td><td>73</td><td></td><td>77</td><td>-8</td><td>-4</td><td>76</td><td>-7</td><td>-3</td></tr><tr><td>Natural Gas*</td><td>68</td><td>75</td><td>37</td><td>60</td><td>8</td><td>15</td><td>60</td><td>8</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td> Solar </td><td>61</td><td>75</td><td>14</td><td>67</td><td>-6</td><td>8</td><td>64</td><td>-3</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Wood</td><td>66</td><td>75</td><td>8</td><td>52</td><td>14</td><td>23</td><td>51</td><td>15</td><td>24</td></tr><tr><td>Which of the following actions can people</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>take to help reduce climate change? (*)</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Stop using aerosol spray cans Total</td><td>34 58</td><td>56 68</td><td>22 10</td><td>38 56</td><td>-4 2</td><td>18 12</td><td>43 59</td><td>-9 -1</td><td>13 9</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 5. Thematic analysis of perceived personal impacts of climate change.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Thematic categories and representative quotationsa</td><td>n (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Heat and drought</td><td>15 (29.41)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Where I live, it&#x27;s going to get hotter&#x27;. - Henry, 10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It will affect my life because if it is too dry, we will have a drought&#x27;. - Carlos, 10 Animals</td><td>9 (17.65)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;I won&#x27;t be able to see as many animals as I can now&#x27;. - Owen, 12. &#x27;Nature is going to affect the animals&#x27;. - Isabella, 12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Sea level rise</td><td>6 (11.76)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It will make it so house prices will be higher, since</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>coastal land will sink, since glaciers will make more water&#x27;. - Ali, 12.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Global warming will overflow our water amount&#x27;. - Abigail, 12 Disasters and loss of life</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It could cause bad accidents to happen&#x27;. - Olivia, 12</td><td>6 (11.76)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It can make [Western state] have a drought and people will die&#x27;. - Riley, 10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lifestyle</td><td>5 (9.80)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It will affect the weather and then I&#x27;ll probably spend more time inside&#x27;. - Scarlett, 12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Climate could affect my life because we would need to adapt to the new climate&#x27;. - Aubrey, 11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Travel and recreation</td><td>2 (3.92)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It will make you not be able to go to certain places&#x27;. - Gabe, 12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;The mountains will be dry and not fun during winter&#x27;. - Bill, 12.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Food</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2 (3.92)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Farms won&#x27;t be as able to produce that much food&#x27;. - Peyton, 10.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;If [climate change] kills animals and they have (don&#x27;t have) food&#x27;. - Luke, 11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Better world</td><td></td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2 (3.92)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It will make [it] better because the world will be made better&#x27;. - Dominic, 10 &#x27;It will more better because I help make a difference&#x27;. - Bryan, 10.</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $N = 5 1$ . a Categories appear in order of descending prevalence. Participant’s responses could be categorized into more than one response type. $^ { \flat } \eta \ ( \% ) =$ number of participant responses corresponding with each thematic category, followed by the percentage of full sample coverage.

Survey Results. In an open-ended postprogram survey item, children were asked to describe how they believed climate change would affect their lives. Further demonstrating children’s awareness of both scientific and social dimensions, responses ranged from naming the physical impacts of climate change (e.g. heat and drought) to describing the effects of climate change on social systems and livelihoods (e.g. travel and recreation; food). Despite the question’s focus on perceived personal impacts, children responded in ways that displayed an awareness of climate change as an issue of both local and global importance. A thematic analysis summary of children’s responses is provided in Table 5.

In a second postprogram survey item, children were asked to respond, yes or no, to the question: ‘Did Science, Camera, Action! help you to feel like you can make a difference in the world around you?’ In total, 54 of 55 participants provided a response. Of these, all but one participant $( n = 5 3 ; 9 8 . 2 \% )$ responded affirmatively. In an open-ended follow-up item, children were asked to explain why. Results of a thematic analysis are summarized in Table 6. Children’s sense of agency – or belief in their agentic capabilities – was strengthened by feeling informed about, (1) Specific actions they could take to reduce their environmental impact; (2) How to help the environment more generally; (3) What is happening in the world; and (4) How they could improve their communities and the world. Children’s beliefs that they could make a difference in the world were also explained by children in terms of their greater confidence that they – as individuals and as children in general – could have a positive impact. In sum, SCA supported children’s sense of agency by strengthening their knowledge and building their confidence.

Focus Group Findings. Beyond serving as a venue in which children were able to demonstrate their increased awareness about climate change, focus group discussions provided a space for children to reflect on their altered thoughts and feelings about climate change. Put differently, focus groups shed light on how children experienced their growing climate change awareness. Children often described their experiences in SCA as inspiring and motivating, due in part to the knowledge they gained. As ten-year-old Ben explained, ‘Since I know more about climate change, now I realize how it’s kind of important to act.’ Feeling informed led to a greater sense of competence and enthusiasm. Mirroring survey findings, children said that SCA boosted their knowledge and built their confidence that they could make a difference. As Cecelia (age 10) put it, ‘I felt more confident since I knew more’.

Table 6. Thematic analysis of SCA’s impact on sense of agency.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Thematic categories and representative quotationsa</td><td>nb (%)</td></tr><tr><td>The program helped me to feel like I can make a difference in the world because ... SCA helped me to feel informed about ...</td><td>53 (98.15)</td></tr><tr><td>Specific actions I can take. &#x27;Because I know what small things I can do&#x27;. - Ali, 12</td><td>13 (24.07)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because it gives me ideas to take action&#x27;. - Arie, 10 How to help the environment..</td><td>10 (18.52)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;We learned how to recycle and save our ecosystem&#x27;. - Henry, 10 &#x27;Because it showed me that I can find ways to help the environment&#x27; - Abigail, 12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>What is happening in the world. &#x27;It helped me know what the world is like and how to protect it&#x27;. - Noah, 10</td><td>5 (9.26)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because I know what is happening so I can help&#x27;. - Cecelia, 10 How I can improve my community and the world</td><td>4 (7.41)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;It can help me make a change to the community&#x27;. - Tim, 11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>SCA strengthened my confidence that ... I can make a difference..</td><td>5 (9.26)</td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because I think that I can do it, too&#x27;. - Miguel, 12</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because now I know I can make a difference in the world/my community&#x27;. - Sydney, 12 Kids can make a difference.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because at first I thought that kids don&#x27;t really get a bigger opportunity to help change the world&#x27;. -</td><td>4 (7.41)</td></tr><tr><td>Aubrey, 11</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;Because all the kids have some power&#x27;. - Athena, 10</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>The program did not help me to feel like I could make a difference in the world because ...I already felt</td><td>1 (1.85)</td></tr><tr><td>that way.</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>&#x27;I already did think that I could&#x27;. - Eli, 12</td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

Note. $N = 5 4$ . a Categories appear in order of descending prevalence. Participant’s responses could be categorized into more than one response type. $^ { \mathsf { b } } { } _ { n }$ $( \% ) =$ number of participant’s responses corresponding with each thematic category, followed by the percentage of full sample coverage.

Children’s heightened awareness about climate change – particularly regarding its social and political dimensions – extended beyond topics covered in the program, indicating that SCA was not children’s sole climate change information source. For example, feelings of urgency about the need for action on climate change were fueled by a perception that existing responses to climate change were insufficient or nonexistent. Such views were expressed across age groups and research sites. Ali (age 12) said, ‘Nobody is literally doing anything [about climate change]’.

A belief in the inadequacy of others’ actions was pervasive and was explained as a cause for concern. In the following exchange, Rose and Abigail had once shared a view that people were taking necessary actions to address climate change but agreed that they were mistaken. In fact, people were making it worse.

Rose (12): I didn’t think that it was such a big deal, but now I think it’s more of a bigger deal. Some people need to work on changing it, because, or else our world is just going to fall apart.

Tim (11): Our world’s already falling apart.

Abigail (12): I didn’t think that it was bad until I heard that people aren’t doing very much to help it, that they’re just letting it happen, and that they’re contributing to it.

Rose (12): Yeah, I felt like a lot more people were definitely doing something about it.

Abigail (12): I thought people were actually trying to help instead of contributing to the mess.

Children’s greater awareness of the importance of human action in addressing climate change, turned inward, caused some to reflect on their own behaviors. Ten-year-old Noah said that, after SCA, he thinks ‘more about how the world is affected by what we do.’

Despite its concerning aspects, most children enjoyed participating in the program. Twelveyear-old Isabella said simply, ‘It was fun learning about climate change.’ For some, SCA was fun because they enjoyed the hands-on activities. For others, it was a matter of discovering new things about their world.

I enjoyed learning about … climate change and different things that we can do to help the environment. – Katherine (12)

I enjoyed learning stuff and I liked learning about climate change. I like learning about what greenhouse gases are and what carbon footprints are. – Tim (11)

As Tim went on to explain, and further echoed by Grace, learning about the risks and hazards posed by climate change was compelling. The SCA was engaging because it prompted concern and offered an outlet for action.

[The program] changed my point of view because, at first, I didn’t really care or didn’t want to do anything about [climate change], but then I came here and started to learn about it. It could be dangerous, and then I started to see it different and I started to do more stuff about it. – Tim (11)

I liked all of the activities that we did, but I also liked learning about the dangers and how I can make a difference. – Grace (11)

Importantly, opportunities for action provided by the program allowed children to develop a sense of agency that they can contribute to minimizing harms through their own decisions and collaborative actions. Put differently, children’s hope in the future was supported by their actions in the present.

I think more about [climate change] now, more than I used to. I know what’s going on in our world and how the world’s changing by every minute. And I know I can make a difference by helping. – Cecelia (10)

# Discussion

This mixed-methods study explored how ten- to twelve-year-old children experienced and made sense of their growing climate change awareness through an after-school program that used participatory methods to encourage their climate change action. Despite wide variation at the program’s outset, children’s average climate change awareness post-program had expanded beyond their own pre-program knowledge, beyond the average U.S. teen or adult, and in some cases beyond the boundaries of program content. In a fundamental sense, children understood local to global impacts of climate change and its solutions through human action, while expressing a sense of hope for the future and an eagerness to be active participants in the global transformation towards sustainability that is now required (O’Brien, Selboe, and Hayward 2018). Importantly, children’s growing climate change awareness – rather than inducing distraction or avoidance behaviors – became a platform for their expanded agency and informed action to minimize harms.

# Children as capable climate change learners

Findings of the present study suggest that most children entered the program with some level of climate change awareness. Before the program, the amount of time children spent thinking about climate change varied widely, whereas nearly all endorsed the view that ‘Earth’s climate is changing now’. Focus groups lent some clarification to these findings, with some younger participants claiming limited prior familiarity with the topic, and most children declaring some level of exposure, primarily through school (e.g. class, field trips) and mass media (e.g. television, books). Prompted by their exposure to striking sources of climate change imagery (e.g. posters) or information (e.g. news reports), some children told of actively seeking out more information. Children’s prior interest and concern, in this study and in others, underscores the need for empowering learning environments in which children may organize, enhance, and act on this information (Barrows 1998; Kelsey and Armstrong 2012; Leiserowitz, Smith, and Marlon 2011).

In debating the appropriate age at which to begin discussing climate change with young people, some have argued ‘no tragedies before grade four’ (Sobel 1996), whereas others maintain that engaging children is essential although no particular age will feel appropriate (Kelsey and Armstrong 2012). Some research has deemed late childhood (i.e. ages ten to twelve) an ‘ideal age group’ with which to introduce the issue given children’s abstract thinking capacity and onset of interest in global problems that occurs around this period (Ojala 2016, 210; see also Chawla and Cushing 2007). Moreover, late childhood directly follows the age range (i.e. seven to ten) identified by Kellert (1985) as most critical for children’s development of emotional concern towards the environment, so learning about climate change during this stage may build on children’s existing interests (Muldoon et al. 2019). Indeed, according to Kellert (2002), the developmental period between ages six and twelve can be ‘a time of greatly expanded interest, curiosity, and capacity for assimilating knowledge and understanding the natural world’ (p. 133). In this study, despite age-based variation in prior exposure to the topic, ten- to twelve-year olds readily absorbed basic climate change information – including its potential personal and local impacts – and were generally motivated by their knowledge. This finding is consistent with previous studies asserting that children’s positive (i.e. hope-inspired) engagement can coexist alongside their growing climate change awareness and concern (Stevenson and Peterson 2015).

Children’s heightened awareness was evident both through a traditional knowledge assessment as well as in focus groups where some children exhibited an elaborated climate change knowledge that extended beyond topics covered in the program. Children’s learning gains following the program are notable, given that the program consisted of just six-hour-long educational activities facilitated over a period of nine weeks (Table 1). It seems likely, however, that SCA’s photovoice and action components also contributed to learning by encouraging children’s personal and place-based connection-making as well as their leadership role in individual and collaborative action projects (Blythe and Harre 2012; Sipos, Battisti, and Grimm 2008).

Given that climate change education research is predominantly classroom-based (Monroe et al. 2017), it is worth noting several features of the informal setting that likely facilitated the success of this program. For context, the BGC is a U.S. nonprofit organization that provides mostly unstructured after-school youth services and, with annual membership fees as low as five U.S. dollars, relies heavily on volunteer assistance (Anderson-Butcher, Newsome, and Ferrari 2003). For the duration of the program, the research team – treated by the BGC as a volunteer group – was given dedicated program space and almost total autonomy in program implementation, though BGC staff approval was sought (and granted) for community action projects. As previous studies have noted, informal settings can offer great flexibility in program scheduling, structure, and content, thus overcoming common limitations of more structured learning environments (e.g. the formal classroom; Birmingham and Barton 2014; Blythe and Harre 2012; Stapleton 2015). Importantly, this flexibility allowed the program to be action-focused as well as participatory in nature – allowing children to envision and enact their own project ideas.

Though the informal setting was not without challenges – especially around ensuring children’s consistent participation, which was not mandatory – this research offers a collaborative, multisite positive case study demonstrating the potential for informal after-school settings to be empowering spaces for young people to learn and actively engage. In the formal U.S. classroom, challenges to action-oriented climate change education range from time constraints to lack of teacher training, and – given the politicization of climate change – fear of parental complaints and accusations of advocacy (Monroe et al. 2017; Plutzer et al. 2016; Wise 2010). Unless or until these challenges are addressed through shifts in policy and culture, informal learning spaces may be more conducive to the forms of climate change education that go beyond ‘just the facts’ to enact an alternative vision of science learning that ‘incorporates both knowing and doing’ (Birmingham and Barton 2014, 310 [emphases added]).

Notwithstanding SCA’s action focus, findings of this study suggest that, following the program, children’s comprehension of basic facts about climate change had grown significantly and exceeded the average knowledge level of U.S. teens and adults. Moreover, children’s enthusiasm to share their knowledge with family and community members was channeled into action projects (e.g. a city council presentation; photography exhibition) that allowed them to disseminate knowledge while advocating for a sustainable future (Trott 2019). Towards defining and developing methods for children’s constructive climate change engagement, findings of this study suggest that – beyond enabling children to acquire the type of awareness that is crucial for societal transformation – children can serve as intergenerational climate change communicators, circulating critical knowledge and raising climate change awareness with the adults in their lives (Ballantyne, Connell, and Fien 1998; Lawson et al. 2018; Maddox et al. 2011; Williams, McEwen, and Quinn 2017). Not only is reaching adults necessary, given the widespread nature of climate change misconceptions in the United States (Leiserowitz, Smith, and Marlon 2011; Marlon et al. 2018), but in doing so, children can be compelling environmental messengers, given that they represent the future generations whose lives will be increasingly disrupted by ever-intensifying climate change impacts (Mitchell et al. 2008; Page 2007; Stapleton 2018).

The potential role of children and youth as knowledge-bearers and environmental messengers is commonly evoked in policy initiatives in which children’s ‘pester power’ is seen as a possible way of transporting climate change education, concern, and action from classrooms to households (Satchwell 2013, 298). This role is important, given the reality that, at present, it is not the children but ‘parents and other adults in the community who have the immediate power to influence prevailing environmental policies and practices’ (Ballantyne, Connell, and Fien 1998, 286). From this perspective, children’s constructive climate change engagement can be a means to engage a much broader audience, while – as this study found – cultivating children’s sense of agency that they can make a difference. These findings resonate with those of previous studies, demonstrating that young people are both willing and able to assume the role of change agent through youth-focused environmental programming (Blanchet-Cohen and Di Mambro 2015; Dittmer et al. 2018; Hart 1997; Haynes and Tanner 2015; Maddox et al. 2011; Percy-Smith and Burns 2013; Williams, McEwen, and Quinn 2017). To the extent that younger generations inform older ones, while enacting sustainability in the present, children’s climate change action can be ‘prefigurative’ both in the cultural sense (i.e. via intergenerational learning; Lawson et al. 2018; McCowan 2009) as well as politically, by instantiating aspects of children’s desired futures now (Trott 2016).

# Children as critical climate change actors

The first article in this series named two critical dimensions of children’s constructive climate change engagement (Trott 2019). First, children’s enjoyment of program activities – and their enthusiasm to engage – provided a portal through which to learn, connect, and act on climate change. Second, children’s agentic action – through youth-led action projects – cultivated their sense of agency. Findings of this study suggest that children’s agentic action may have, in turn, been an important vehicle for their growing climate change awareness. Acting on climate change both individually and collaboratively supported their learning while strengthening their sense of agency.

Most educational programming assumes that climate change action is dependent (at least in part) upon knowledge, in that order (Satchwell 2013). Taking seriously the notion that antecedents to action are ‘much more complex than knowledge alone’ (Chawla and Cushing 2007, 437), researchers have recommended alternative approaches to climate change education that emphasize personal relevance (e.g. local impacts), acknowledge children’s emotions, and integrate social and scientific dimensions of the issue (Chawla and Cushing 2007; Monroe et al. 2017). Findings of this study suggest a mutually reinforcing, reciprocal relationship between children’s knowledge and action: Not only were children motivated to act on the basis of their knowledge, but children’s action projects were a critical mechanism for learning about themselves and their world (Sipos, Battisti, and Grimm 2008; Dittmer et al. 2018).

By integrating the scientific and social dimensions of climate change in educational activities, this research responds to calls for moving beyond traditional science-oriented approaches to climate change education and towards taking an inter- or transdisciplinary approach (Monroe et al. 2017). Specifically, SCA’s educational activities focused on the scientific properties and human causes of climate change, as well as the importance of human action in enacting solutions, particularly in light of ecosystem impacts (e.g. on forests, animals). Despite a focus on ecosystem over societal impacts, throughout the program, children commonly and easily connected the dots between key scientific elements of climate change (e.g. global warming melts glaciers) and related social implications (e.g. loss of homes due to sea-level rise). Moreover, children demonstrated an elaborated knowledge of climate change topics beyond those covered in SCA. For example, children expressed concerns about human and policy inaction on climate change. A key theme in participants’ views of the impact of SCA on their climate change awareness was that SCA provided more or different information compared to their previous exposure and that, in many cases, SCA illuminated ‘how bad’ the effects of climate change could be.

Importantly, children’s extrapolations about the effects of climate change on human systems – despite their often apocalyptic predictions – were not perceived as personally life threatening, and their concerns about human inaction were not expressed as a reason for despair. Rather, discussions of participants’ social concerns seemed to strengthen their connection to climate change as a human issue, and further inspired their motivation for action. In describing environmental risks, children are known to use severe language (Brown, Henderson, and Armstrong 1987). At the same time, children often express optimism and tend to perceive a low risk to self (Whalen et al. 1994; Howe, Kahn, and Friedman 1996). In SCA, an overall positive outlook was maintained despite children’s apparent grasp of the ways in which climate change may affect them personally. Research suggests that young people tend to perceive societal or distant futures as distinct from their own or near futures, making it possible to be pessimistic about societal and environmental problems, but optimistic about their own lives (Cook 2016; Holfelder 2019).

Through their action projects, children were able to observe and experience the effects of their actions on others and the environment, which expanded their sense of agency to make a difference (Trott 2019). Children’s action projects likely also served to ameliorate children’s concerns that no action was being taken to address the issue. As Kelsey and Armstrong (2012) have suggested, when inviting children’s participation:

… involvement in community initiatives to address climate change would provide the opportunity for CCE [climate change education] to be empowering, confidence building, and solution-based aiding in the reframing of climate change from tragedy to being embedded in local context. (194)

Findings of this study suggest that, by taking ownership of the problem and its solutions individually and collaboratively, children were able to develop a sense of constructive hope (Ojala 2012) – that they can envision and enact sustainable alternatives. These findings reflect those of previous studies with high school students and informal climate change educators, indicating that hope is supported by beliefs in humans’ (and one’s own) efficacy to make a difference (Li and Monroe 2017; Swim and Fraser 2013).

It is worth noting that some children, rather than disengaging from the problem, actively sought out additional information between program sessions. As a result, SCA became a space not only for children’s basic climate change learning and action, but one in which children could bring their additional questions and express their frustrations about climate change – most notably around human inaction and inadequate policy responses. In SCA, it is possible that children’s action projects – which included political advocacy and community awareness-raising – were prompted by children’s concerns in this regard. In advocating ‘strategic’ forms of climate change action by children and youth, Chawla and Cushing (2007) have noted that ‘behaviors with the largest potential benefits for the environment require political engagement’ (437). According to them, although individual, small-scale behavior changes are significant in developing a sense of personal competence, especially in children, young people must also gain a sense of collective competence as citizens whose collective actions are relevant to the health of the environment. Efforts to hold institutions accountable and demand policy change may, for children, spark their democratic imaginations and promote continued civic participation, thus providing a buffer against future disengagement (Chawla and Cushing 2007; Hayward 2012). On a societal level, political engagement means strengthening democratic participation and enabling climate change action at the immense scale now required (Kenis and Mathijs 2012; O’Brien, Selboe, and Hayward 2018).

In action-oriented programming, remaining open to discussing the political dimension of climate change is important because children’s comprehensive understanding of the problem is not possible without consideration for the most serious challenges to societal transformation. Moreover, children’s capacity to envision and enact a sustainable future requires their understanding that change must occur at multiple levels – that their own actions are meaningful and consequential, but exist along a much wider spectrum of necessary actions. In theorizing children’s constructive climate change engagement, children’s actions matter because they provide a portal through which to learn about climate change and to make a tangible difference in their families and communities. Furthermore, children’s sense of agency matters because it can support children’s sustained interest and active participation. Finally, children’s awareness matters because, as this study found, it can be both an antecedent to agency and a consequence of action, while serving as the raw material for intergenerational and political advocacy (Lawson et al. 2018; O’Brien, Selboe, and Hayward 2018; Stapleton 2018). Facilitating children’s constructive climate change engagement means harnessing the transformative potential of young people as agents of present-day as well as future change whose voices and actions can contribute to building a better world.

# Limitations and strengths

A key limitation of this study is that its voluntary participants represent a sample of convenience, rather than a random sample, which raises doubts about the external validity of findings. Moreover, since children self-selected into the program, it is likely that they arrived with interest in program content and motivation to engage. A question for future research is whether findings replicate in other contexts, and whether children without initial motivation to participate in the program also experience its positive effects. A strength of this study was its use of digital cameras, which was successful in recruiting some children who had little to no interest in science, nature, or climate change prior to SCA. The need for photography equipment, however, as well as program materials and action project budgets, introduces a serious challenge to the feasibility of this type of program if not supported by institutional or grant funding. Finally, due to space limitations, a deeper discussion of how children conceived of their own agency – and the impact of such agency on their subsequent actions in school, family, and community settings – was not possible. Moreover, this article offers little discussion of children’s transformed views and actions related to science and the environment (i.e. attitude and behavior change) following their program participation. Towards making sense of children’s constructive climate change engagement, future manuscripts in this series will explore these topics.

# Conclusion

Given the transformative potential rightly attributed to education in averting climate change threats, there is a need to develop educational methods that are constructive – simultaneously building awareness, enabling agency, and enacting change (D’Amato and Krasny 2011; Li and Monroe 2017). There is especially a need to develop such practices for use with children who – due to their age – will be most impacted by climate change but are presently the least often engaged. Beyond merely expanding the flow of information to reach a younger audience, it is necessary to construct empowering spaces for children to engage with climate change topics ‘critically and creatively’, while envisioning and enacting seemingly impossible pathways to a sustainable future (Jickling 2013, 167). Findings of this study shed light on methods for cultivating children’s constructive climate change engagement. In particular, through the combination of hands-on educational activities, photovoice process, and youth-led action projects, children simultaneously acquired critical knowledge, made personal and place-based connections to the issue, and enacted sustainable solutions they envisioned for themselves.

In the immediate term, the significance of climate change education lies in its potential to generate an informed and engaged public that is prepared to advocate and act to avert the most destabilizing effects of climate change. Over the longer term, the promise of climate change education – and environmental education more generally – is that it may serve to transform the cultures of high-emitting countries away from the sorts of non-sustainable practices and systems that have so far defined life in the twenty-first century (Wals 2007). Children can be competent knowledge-bearers and critical actors in this transformation.

# Notes

1. Socio-scientific issues are conceptualized as ‘factually and ethically complex and controversial issues of modern science … [with potential solutions that] typically involve diverse social, political, economic as well as value considerations’ (Sakschewski et al. 2014, 2293). Socio-scientific issues share a similar meaning with science, technology, and society issues (Bencze, Sperling, and Carter 2012).   
2. The BGC is among the largest community-based youth development organizations in the U.S., serving over four million youth annually – the majority low-income (BGC 2018).

# Acknowledgment

The author would like to thank the Boys and Girls Clubs where this research took place, Dr. Laura Sample McMeeking at the Colorado State University (CSU) STEM Center, and the CSU research assistants who made this programming and research possible: Anna Hoover, Christine Zirbel, Jade Croghan, Jimmy McCulloch, and Pauline Freud.

# Disclosure statement

No potential conflict of interest was reported by the authors.

# Funding

This work was supported by National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration; Society for Community Research and Action; Society for the Psychological Study of Social Issues

# Notes on contributor

Carlie D. Trott is an assistant professor in the Department of Psychology at the University of Cincinnati. She earned a Master of Science and PhD in Applied Social Psychology from Colorado State University. Her research employs community-based, participatory, and action research methodologies to promote agency and collaborative action around local environmental problems while strengthening civic and science engagement by marginalized groups. Dr. Trott’s research emphasizes interdisciplinary collaboration and integrated, arts-based, and action-oriented engagement methods towards addressing sustainability challenges. Dr. Trott teaches undergraduate and graduate courses in social and community psychology at the University of Cincinnati where she also advises students in the Community and Organizational Research for Action (CORA) doctoral program.

# ORCID

Carlie D. Trott $\textcircled{1}$ http://orcid.org/0000-0002-4400-4287

# References

Anderson-Butcher, D., W. S. Newsome, and T. M. Ferrari, 2003. “Participation in Boys and Girls Clubs and Relationships to Youth Outcomes.” Journal of Community Psychology 31(1): 39–55. doi:10.1002/jcop.10036.   
Ballantyne, R., S. Connell, and J. Fien. 1998. “Students as Catalysts of Environmental Change: A Framework for Researching Intergenerational Influence through Environmental Education.” Environmental Education Research 4(3): 285–298. doi:10.80/13504620600942972.   
Barrows, A. 1998. “Crying for the Manatees.” ReVision 20(4): 9–10.   
Bencze, L., E. Sperling, and L. Carter. 2012. “Students’ Research-Informed Socio-Scientific Activism: Re/visions for a Sustainable Future.” Research in Science Education 42(1): 129–148. doi:10.1007/s11165-011-9260-3.   
Birmingham, D., and A. Calabrese Barton. 2014. “Putting on a Green Carnival: Youth Taking Educated Action on Socioscientific Issues.” Journal of Research in Science Teaching 51(3): 286–314. doi:10.1002/tea.21127.   
Blanchet-Cohen, N., and G. Di Mambro. 2015. “Environmental Education Action Research with Immigrant Children in Schools: Space, Audience and Influence.” Action Research 13(2): 123–140. doi:10.1177/1476750314553679.   
Blythe, C., and N. Harre. 2012. “Inspiring Youth Sustainability Leadership: Six Elements of a Transformative Youth Eco-Retreat.” Ecopsychology 4(4): 336–344. doi:10.1089/eco.2012.0055.   
Bofferding, L., and M. Kloser. 2015. “Middle and High School Students’ Conceptions of Climate Change Mitigation and Adaptation Strategies.” Environmental Education Research 21(2): 275–294. doi:10.1080/13504622.2014.888401.   
Boys & Girls Clubs of America. 2018. Annual Report. http://www.bgca.org/   
Braun, V., and V. Clarke. 2006. “Using Thematic Analysis in Psychology.” Qualitative Research in Psychology 3(2): 77–101. doi:10.1191/1478088706qp063oa.   
Brown, J. M., J. Henderson, and M. P. Armstrong. 1987. “Children’s Perceptions of Nuclear Power Stations as Revealed through Their Drawings.” Journal of Environmental Psychology 7(3): 189–199. doi:10.1016/S0272- 4944(87)80029-4.   
Busch, K. C., J. A. Henderson, and K. T. Stevenson. 2018. “Broadening Epistemologies and Methodologies in Climate Change Education Research.” Environmental Education Research 25 (6): 955–971. doi:10.1080/13504622.2018. 1514588.   
Byrne, J., M. Ideland, C. Malmberg, and M. Grace. 2014. “Climate Change and Everyday Life: Repertoires Children Use to Negotiate a Socio-Scientific Issue.” International Journal of Science Education 36(9): 1491–1509. doi:10. 1080/09500693.2014.891159.   
Chawla, L., and D. F. Cushing. 2007. “Education for Strategic Environmental Behavior.” Environmental Education Research 13(4): 437–452. doi:10.1080/13504620701581539.   
Chawla, L., and H. Heft. 2002. “Children’s Competence and the Ecology of Communities: A Functional Approach to the Evaluation of Participation.” Journal of Environmental Psychology 22(1–2): 201–216. doi:10.1006/jevp.2002. 0244.   
Cook, K. 2015. “Grappling with Wicked Problems: Exploring Photovoice as a Decolonizing Methodology in Science Education.” Cultural Studies of Science Education 10(3): 581–592. doi:10.1007/s11422-014-9613-0.   
Cook, J. 2016. “Young Adults’ Hopes for the Long-Term Future: From Re-Enchantment with Technology to Faith in Humanity.” Journal of Youth Studies 19(4): 517–532. doi:10.1080/13676261.2015.1083959.   
D’Amato, L. G., and M. E. Krasny. 2011. “Outdoor Adventure Education: Applying Transformative Learning Theory to Understanding Instrumental Learning and Personal Growth in Environmental Education.” The Journal of Environmental Education 42(4): 237–254. doi:10.1080/00958964.2011.581313.   
Dawson, V. 2015. “Western Australian High School Students’ Understandings about the Socioscientific Issue of Climate Change.” International Journal of Science Education 37(7): 1024–1043. doi:10.1080/09500693.2015. 1015181.   
Dittmer, L., F. Mugagga, A. Metternich, P. Schweizer-Ries, G. Asiimwe, and M. Riemer. 2018. “We Can Keep the Fire Burning’: Building Action Competence through Environmental Justice Education in Uganda and Germany.” Local Environment 23(2): 144–157. doi:10.1080/13549839.2017.1391188.   
Durand, T. M., and M. B. Lykes. 2006. “Think Globally, Act Locally: A Global Perspective on Mobilizing Adults for Positive Youth Development.” In Mobilizing Adults for Positive Youth Development: Strategies for Closing the Gap between Beliefs and Behaviors, edited by E. Gil Clary and Jean E. Rhodes, 233–254. Boston, MA: Springer.   
Fisher, S. R. 2016. “Life Trajectories of Youth Committing to Climate Activism.” Environmental Education Research 22(2): 229–247. doi:10.1080/13504622.2015.1007337.   
Hart, R. A. 1997. Children’s Participation: The Theory and Practice of Involving Young Citizens in Community Development and Environmental Care. London: Routledge.   
Haynes, K., and T. M. Tanner. 2015. “Empowering Young People and Strengthening Resilience: Youth-Centred Participatory Video as a Tool for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction.” Children’s Geographies 13(3): 357–371. doi:10.1080/14733285.2013.848599.   
Hayward, B. 2012. Children, Citizenship and Environment: Nurturing Democratic Imagination in a Changing World. New York: Routledge.   
Hicks, D. 2014. Educating for Hope in Troubled Times: Climate Change and the Transition to a Post-Carbon Future. London: Institute of Education Press.   
Hicks, D., and C. Holden. 2007. “Remembering the Future: What Do Children Think?” Environmental Education Research 13(4): 501–512. doi:10.1080/13504620701581596.   
Holfelder, A.-K. 2019. “Towards a Sustainable Future with Education?” Sustainability Science 14 (4): 943-952. doi:10. 1007/s11625-019-00682-z.   
Howe, D. C., P. H. Kahn, Jr, and B. Friedman. 1996. “Along the Rio Negro: Brazilian Children’s Environmental Views and Values.” Developmental Psychology 32(6): 979–987. doi:10.1037/0012-1649.32.6.979.   
Jensen, B. B., and K. Schnack. 1997. “The Action Competence Approach in Environmental Education.” Environmental Education Research 3(2): 163–178. doi:10.1080/13504620600943053.   
Jickling, B. 2013. “Normalizing Catastrophe: An Educational Response.” Environmental Education Research 19(2): 161–176. doi:10.1080/13504622.2012.721114.   
Karpudewan, M., W.-M. Roth, and M. N. S. B. Abdullah. 2015. “Enhancing Primary School Students’ Knowledge about Global Warming and Environmental Attitude Using Climate Change Activities.” International Journal of Science Education 37(1): 31–54. doi:10.1080/09500693.2014.958600.   
Kellert, S. R. 1985. “Attitudes toward Animals: Age-related Development among Children.” The Journal of Environmental Education 16(3): 29–39. doi:10.1080/00958964.1985.9942709.   
Kellert, S. R. 2002. “Experiencing Nature: Affective, Cognitive, and Evaluative Development.” In Children and Nature: Psychological, Sociocultural, and Evolutionary Investigations, edited by Peter H. Kahn and Stephen R. Kellert, 117–152. Cambridge, MA: Massachusetts Institute of Technology.   
Kelsey, E., and C. Armstrong. 2012. “Finding Hope in a World of Environmental Catastrophe.” In Learning for Sustainability in Times of Accelerating Change, edited by Arjen E. J. Wals and Peter B. Corcoran, 187–200. Wageningen, The Netherlands: Wageningen Academic Publishers.   
Kenis, A., and E. Mathijs. 2012. “Beyond Individual Behaviour Change: The Role of Power, Knowledge and Strategy in Tackling Climate Change.” Environmental Education Research 18(1): 45–65. doi:10.1080/13504622.2011.576315.   
Koger, S. 2013. “Psychological and Behavioral Aspects of Sustainability.” Sustainability 5(7): 3006–3008. doi:10.3390/ su5073006.   
Lawson, D. F., K. T. Stevenson, M. N. Peterson, S. J. Carrier, R. Strnad, and E. Seekamp. 2018. “Intergenerational Learning: Are Children Key in Spurring Climate Action?” Global Environmental Change 53: 204–208. doi:10.1016/j. gloenvcha.2018.10.002.   
Ledley, T. S., J. Rooney-Varga, and F. Niepold. 2017. “Addressing Climate Change through Education.” In Oxford Research Encyclopedia of Environmental Science. Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.   
Leiserowitz, A., N. Smith, and J. R. Marlon. 2011. American Teens’ Knowledge of Climate Change: Yale Project on Climate Change Communication. New Haven, CT: Yale University. http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/wp-content/uploads/2016/02/2011_04_American-Teens%E2%80%99-Knowledge-of-Climate-Change.pdf   
Li, C. J., and M. C. Monroe. 2017. “Exploring the Essential Psychological Factors in Fostering Hope Concerning Climate Change.” Environmental Education Research 25 (6): 936–954. doi:10.1080/13504622.2017.1367916.   
Maddox, P., C. Doran, I. D. Williams, and M. Kus. 2011. “The Role of Intergenerational Influence in Waste Education Programmes: The THAW Project.” Waste Management 31(12): 2590–2600. doi:10.1016/j.wasman.2011.07.023.   
Marlon, J. R., P. Howe, M. Mildenberger, A. Leiserowitz, and X. Wang. 2018. Yale Climate Opinion Maps 2018. New Haven, CT: Yale University. http://climatecommunication.yale.edu/visualizations-data/ycom-us-2018/?est= teachGW&type=value&geo=county   
Mason, L., and M. Santi. 1998. “Discussing the Greenhouse Effect: Children’s Collaborative Discourse Reasoning and Conceptual Change.” Environmental Education Research 4(1): 67–85. doi:10.1080/1350462980040105.   
McCowan, T. 2009. Rethinking Citizenship Education: A Curriculum for Participatory Democracy. London: Continuum.   
Mitchell, T., K. Haynes, N. Hall, W. Choong, and K. Oven. 2008. “The Roles of Children and Youth in Communicating Disaster Risk.” Children Youth and Environments 18(1): 254–279. doi:10.7721/chilyoutenvi.18.1.0254\.   
Monroe, M. C., R. R. Plate, A. Oxarart, A. Bowers, and W. A. Chaves. 2017. “Identifying Effective Climate Change Education Strategies: A Systematic Review of the Research.” Environmental Education Research 25 (6): 791–812. doi:10.1080/13504622.2017.1360842.   
Muldoon, R., T. Shelford, O. Holland, and D. H. Hryciw. 2019. “Environmental Awareness of Primary School Aged Children in Brisbane, Australia.” International Journal of Innovation in Science and Mathematics Education 27(2): 277–303.   
Niebert, K., and H. Gropengießer. 2014. “Understanding the Greenhouse Effect by Embodiment – Analysing and Using Students’ and Scientists’ Conceptual Resources.” International Journal of Science Education 36(2): 277–303. doi:10.1080/09500693.2013.763298.   
O’Brien, K., E. Selboe, and B. Hayward. 2018. “Exploring Youth Activism on Climate Change: Dutiful, Disruptive, and Dangerous Dissent.” Ecology and Society 23(3): 42. doi:10.5751/ES-10287-230342.   
Ojala, M. 2012. “Regulating Worry, Promoting Hope: How Do Children, Adolescents, and Young Adults Cope with Climate Change?” International Journal of Environmental and Science Education 7(4): 537–561.   
Ojala, M. 2016. “Preparing Children for the Emotional Challenges of Climate Change: A Review of the Research.” In Education in Times of Environmental Crises: Teaching Children to Be Agents of Change, edited by Ken Winograd, 210–218. New York, NY: Routledge.   
Ojala, M. 2017. “Hope and Anticipation in Education for a Sustainable Future.” Futures 94: 76–84. doi:10.1016/j. futures.2016.10.004.   
Oxford Dictionaries. 2019a. s.v. “constructive”. Accessed May 9. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/constructive. Accessed 2019   
Oxford Dictionaries. 2019b. s.v. “perception”. Accessed April 28. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/perception. Accessed 2019   
Oxford Dictionaries 2019c. s.v. “knowledge”. Accessed April 28. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/knowledge. Accessed 2019   
Oxford Dictionaries. 2019d. s.v.“ awareness”. Accessed April 28. https://en.oxforddictionaries.com/definition/awareness. Accessed 2019   
Page, E. A. 2007. Climate Change, Justice and Future Generations. Cheltenham, UK: Edward Elgar.   
Percy-Smith, B., and D. Burns. 2013. “Exploring the Role of Children and Young People as Agents of Change in Sustainable Community Development.” Local Environment 18(3): 323–339. doi:10.1080/13549839.2012.729565.   
Plutzer, E., A. L. Hannah, J. Rosenau, M. S. McCaffrey, M. Berbeco, and A. H. Reid. 2016. Mixed Messages: How Climate is Taught in America’s Schools. Oakland, CA: National Center for Science Education. Retrieved from: http://ncse.com/files/MixedMessages.pdf   
Porter, D., A. J. Weaver, and H. Raptis. 2012. “Assessing Students’ Learning about Fundamental Concepts of Climate Change under Two Different Conditions.” Environmental Education Research 18(5): 665–686. doi:10.1080/ 13504622.2011.640750.   
Pruneau, D., H. Gravel, W. Bourque, and J. Langis. 2003. “Experimentation with a Socio-Constructivist Process for Climate Change Education.” Environmental Education Research 9(4): 429–446. doi:10.1080/1350462032000126096.   
Sadler, T. D., S. A. Barab, and B. Scott. 2007. “What Do Students Gain by Engaging in Socioscientific Inquiry?” Research in Science Education 37(4): 371–391. doi:10.1007/s11165-006-9030-9.   
Sakschewski, M. S. Eggert, S. Schneider, S. Bogeholz. 2014. € “Students’ Socioscientific Reasoning and DecisionMaking on Energy-Related Issues – Development of a Measurement Instrument.” International Journal of Science Education 36(14): 2291–2313. doi:10.1080/09500693.2014.920550.   
Satchwell, C. 2013. “Carbon Literacy Practices’: Textual Footprints between School and Home in Children’s Construction of Knowledge about Climate Change.” Local Environment 18(3): 289–304. doi:10.1080/13549839. 2012.688735.   
Schreiner, C., E. K. Henriksen, and P. J. K. Hansen. 2005. “Climate Education: Empowering Today’s Youth to Meet Tomorrow’s Challenges.” Studies in Science Education 41(1): 3–49. doi:10.1080/03057260508560213.   
Shepardson, D. P., D. Niyogi, S. Choi, and U. Charusombat. 2009. “Seventh Grade Students’ Conceptions of Global Warming and Climate Change.” Environmental Education Research 15(5): 549–570. doi:10.1080/13504622696859.   
Shepardson, D. P., A. Roychoudhury, A. Hirsch, D. Niyogi, and S. M. Top. 2014. “When the Atmosphere Warms it Rains and Ice Melts: Seventh Grade Students’ Conceptions of a Climate System.” Environmental Education Research 20(3): 333–353. doi:10.1080/13504622.2013.803037.   
Sipos, Y., B. Battisti, and K. Grimm. 2008. “Achieving Transformative Sustainability Learning: Engaging Head, Hands and Heart.”” International Journal of Sustainability in Higher Education 9(1): 68–86. doi:10.1108/ 14676370810842193.   
Sobel, D. 1996. Beyond Ecophobia: Reclaiming the Heart in Nature Education. Great Barrington, MA: Orion Society.   
Stapleton, S. R. 2015. “Environmental Identity Development through Social Interactions, Action, and Recognition.” The Journal of Environmental Education 46(2): 94–113. doi:10.1080/00958964.2014.1000813.   
Stapleton, S. R. 2018. “A Case for Climate Justice Education: American Youth Connecting to Intragenerational Climate Injustice in Bangladesh.” Environmental Education Research 25(5): 732–750. doi:10.1080/13504622.2018. 1472220.   
Stevenson, K., and N. Peterson. 2015. “Motivating Action Through Fostering Climate Change Hope and Concern and Avoiding Despair Among Adolescents.” Sustainability 8(6): 1–10. doi:10.3390/su8010006.   
Swim, J. K., and J. Fraser. 2013. “Fostering Hope in Climate Change Educators.” Journal of Museum Education 38(3): 286–297. doi:10.3390/su8010006.   
Taber, F., and N. Taylor. 2009. “Climate of Concern – A Search for Effective Strategies for Teaching Children about Global Warming.” International Journal of Environmental and Science Education 4(2): 97–116.   
Trott, C. D. 2016. “Constructing Alternatives: Envisioning a Critical Psychology of Prefigurative Politics.” Journal of Social and Political Psychology 4(1): 26–285. doi:10.5964/jspp.v4i1.520.   
Trott, C. D. 2017. “Engaging Key Stakeholders in Climate Change: A Community-Based Project for Youth-Led Participatory Climate Action.” Doctoral diss., Colorado State University Libraries.   
Trott, C. D. 2019. “Reshaping Our World: Collaborating With Children for Community-Based Climate Change Action.” Action Research 17(1): 42–62. doi:10.1177/1476750319829209.   
Verlie, B. 2019. “Bearing Worlds: Learning to Live-With Climate Change.” Environmental Education Research 25(5): 751–766. doi:10.1080/13504622.2019.1637823.   
Visintainer, T., and M. Linn. 2015. “Sixth-Grade Students’ Progress in Understanding the Mechanisms of Global Climate Change.” Journal of Science Education and Technology 24(2–3): 287–310. doi:10.1007/s10956-014-9538-0.   
Waldron, F., B. Ruane, R. Oberman, and S. Morris. 2016. “Geographical Process or Global Injustice? Contrasting Educational Perspectives on Climate Change.” Environmental Education Research 25 (6): 895-911. doi:10.1080/ 13504622.2016.1255876.   
Wals, A. E. J. 2007. “Learning in a Changing World and Changing in a Learning World: Reflexively Fumbling towards Sustainability.” Southern African Journal of Environmental Education 24: 35–45.   
Wals, A. E. J., F. Geerling-Eijff, F. Hubeek, S. van der Kroon, and J. Vader. 2008. “All Mixed Up? Instrumental and Emancipatory Learning toward a More Sustainable World: Considerations for EE Policymakers.” Applied Environmental Education & Communication 7(3): 55–65. doi:10.1080/15330150802473027.   
Walsh, E. M., and E. Cordero. 2019. “Youth Science Expertise, Environmental Identity, and Agency in Climate Action Filmmaking.” Environmental Education Research 25(5): 656–677. doi:10.1080/13504622.2019.1569206.   
Wang, C. C., S. Morrel-Samuels, P. M. Hutchison, L. Bell, and R. M. Pestronk. 2004. “Flint Photovoice: Community Building Among Youths, Adults, and Policymakers.” American Journal of Public Health 94(6): 911–913. doi:10. 2105/AJPH.94.6.911.   
Whalen, C. K., B. Henker, R. O’Neil, J. Hollingshead, A. Holman, and B. Moore. 1994. “Optimism in Children’s Judgments of Health and Environmental Risks.” Health Psychology 13(4): 319–325. doi:10.1037/0278-6133.13.4. 319.   
Wibeck, V. 2014. “Enhancing Learning, Communication and Public Engagement about Climate Change – Some Lessons from Recent Literature.” Environmental Education Research 20(3): 387–411. doi:10.1080/13504622.2013. 812720.   
Williams, S., L. J. McEwen, and N. Quinn. 2017. “As the Climate Changes: Intergenerational Action-Based Learning in Relation to Flood Education.” The Journal of Environmental Education 48(3): 154–171. doi:10.1080/00958964.2016. 1256261.   
Wise, S. B. 2010. “Climate Change in the Classroom: Patterns, Motivations, and Barriers to Instruction Among Colorado Science Teachers.” Journal of Geoscience Education 58(5): 297–309. doi:10.5408/1.3559695.