# English and French journal abstracts in the language sciences: Three exploratory studies

Sarah Van Bonn-, John M. Swales

English Language Institute, McKinley Towne Centre, Suite 350, 401 E Liberty St., Ann Arbor, MI 48104-2298, USA

# Abstract

This article compares French and English academic article abstracts from the language sciences in an attempt to understand how and why language choice might affect this part-genre—both in actual use and according to authors’ linguistic and rhetorical perceptions. Two corpora are used: Corpus A consists of abstracts from a French linguistics journal and a corresponding English one; Corpus B contains paired French and English abstracts from the bilingual EAP journal $A S p$ ; additionally, we report on e-mail interview findings from two of the $A S p$ authors. Differences emerged at three levels. First, it was found that certain features such as choice of voice are ascribable to general differences between the two languages. Second, it would appear that personal pronoun use, sentence length and transition word selection can be aligned with expectations as to what constitutes appropriate academic style. Thirdly, differences in the way the research reported is ‘‘situated’’ are most likely due to differences in discourse community size. The methodological implications of these studies are discussed at the close.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Linguistics journal abstracts; Contrastive rhetoric; Discourse analysis of French; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

In many fields, the research article (RA) published in a first-rank peer-reviewed journal remains the ‘‘top’’ genre, at least in the sense that it provides the greatest approbation and reward for its author or authors (Swales, 2004). There are some exceptions of course; in the pure humanities, as in literature studies, a scholarly book published by a reputable press retains pride of place, even though university presses are under increasing financial pressure (Cronin, 2003). At the other extreme, in fast-moving, well-funded technical fields, such as engineering and computer science, the most prestigious genre is the pre-printed conference presentation paper (Ra¨ isa¨ nen, 1999). Such texts are also peer-reviewed (often with high rejection rates) and printed before the conference. But across the broad spectrum of the applied humanities, and the social and health sciences, the RA, available on paper or on the web, or increasingly in both modes of transmission, remains pre-eminent as the prime vehicle for scholarly communication.

The great majority of these RAs now contain an informative abstract, typically of between 100 and 250 words, which attempts to summarize the main features and findings of the accompanying article. Given this development, it is not surprising that this partgenre has attracted considerable attention in recent years. Several groups of computational linguists have been exploring the automatic computer summarization of scientific and medical articles (e.g., Teufel & Moens, 2000). Information scientists are interested in various kinds of standardization that would increase the quality, visibility and retrievability of abstracts (see Chan & Foo, 2004, for a useful review). Hartley, a psychologist, in a long series of papers, has provided convincing empirical evidence that ‘‘structured’’ abstracts, i.e., those with sub-headings, are easier for many readers to process (e.g., Hartley, 1994, 1999). Finally, there has been a long—and strengthening—tradition of investigating the linguistic and rhetorical features of RA abstracts going back to Graetz’s pioneering study published in 1985.

A major focus of the applied linguistic research undertaken since Graetz (1985) has been discourse-analytic. This body of work includes studies by Nwogu (1990), Jordan (1991), Bittencourt dos Santos (1996), Hyland (2000), Dahl (2004), and Lore´ s (2004), all of whom discuss the global features, that is, the rhetorical components or ‘‘moves’’ of abstracts, along with some of their associated rhetorical and linguistic features. Adopting a more evaluative stance, Salager-Meyer (1990) provided evidence that many medical English abstracts at that time lacked important discoursal elements, while Ventola (1994) addressed the difficulty that some German scholars faced in attempting to produce English-language abstracts in their own fields. Along similar lines, Johns (1992) also showed how Brazilian scholars tend to transfer Portuguese structures inappropriately when constructing abstracts in English.

Studies of disciplinary differences in this part-genre are also to be found. The most substantial is Hyland (2000), who studied 800 abstracts drawn from eight fields and published in 1997. It becomes clear from this study that the rhetorical structure of abstracts varies quite considerably according to discipline. Hyland also showed that RA abstracts had evolved over the 1980–97 period. Length had increased, as had the percentages of abstracts carrying opening introductory elements and closing concluding ones. More specifically, Melander, Swales, and Fredrickson (1997) attempted to determine whether variability in the linguistic and rhetorical features of abstracts is a result of discipline/field (medicine, biology, linguistics) or language choice (Swedish or English) and found that discipline prevailed in biology, but language choice was the major determinant in linguistics. Samraj (2002) also examined disciplinary differences in abstracts and showed that they prevailed in sub-fields as closely related as Wildlife Behavior and Conservation Biology, while Dahl (2004) detailed the personal and promotional features of ‘‘argumentative’’ abstracts drawn from economics and linguistics.

Several other researchers, in addition to Melander et al. (1997), have investigated the possible impact of language choice in abstracts. Although the conference abstract is a different genre (Swales & Feak, 2000), it is worth remarking on Yakhontova’s (2002) observation that linguistic and rhetorical differences in conference abstracts in Russian/ Ukrainian and English are most likely primarily a result of the different social and ideological contexts of writing. Martı´ n-Martı´ n and Burgess (2004) examined how academic criticism is realized in Spanish as compared to English RA abstracts, concluding that the English abstracts contain more academic criticism than their Spanish counterparts, but tended to use more impersonal and more indirect ways of criticizing than the Spanish exemplars.

With regard to the specifics of RA abstracts in English, Hyland and Tse (2005) discuss the use of evaluative language, specifically evaluative that clauses in RA abstracts, and their role in highlighting the authors’ main findings. Overall, the investigative forays undertaken by applied linguists tend to suggest that, despite appearances to the contrary, ‘‘abstracts are highly rhetorical’’ (Hyland & Tse, 2005, p. 126). If this view is correct, then abstracts—even though exemplars of a brief and humble part-genre—can provide a valuable source for investigating the cultural causes and consequences of linguistic and rhetorical differences across languages.

The above survey has indicated that a number of contrastive or comparative studies of abstracts in English and other languages, including many of the major European languages, particularly Spanish (see Montesi & Urdiciain [2005] for a review), have already been carried out. One notable exception to date is lack of attention to abstracts written in French—a language, of course, with longstanding rhetorical and academic traditions and in continued academic use among Francophone countries and regions throughout the world. However, there do exist a limited number of studies dealing with rhetorical and linguistic differences between French and English academic prose in general. For example, Birch (1996) discusses some common errors made by French scholars writing in English, including lexical errors and grammatical mistakes like misuse of tenses, determiners, and prepositions. Bachschmidt (1999) presents evidence that written French is more deductive, focused on facts, and oriented towards the rheme (i.e., new information), while written English is more inductive, focused on argument, and oriented towards the theme (i.e., given information). Similarly, Re´ gent (1985) provides evidence that facts and data are emphasized in French texts, while argument is emphasized in English (where facts and data are used secondarily as support for that argument). In addition, Banks (1999) documents French researchers’ perceptions of publishing and presenting their work in English, indicating a need, among other things, for more sophisticated editing services. More recently, publications emanating from the KIAP project in Bergen, Norway, which compares academic prose in English, French and Norwegian are beginning to fill in some important gaps (Breivega, Dahl, & Fløttum, 2002; Dahl, 2004; Fløttum, 2003, 2005; Fløttum & Rastier, 2003; and especially Fløttum, Dahl, & Kinn, 2006).

# 2. Data sources

In this paper we attempt to make a start on filling this gap by offering two types of comparison of English and French journal abstracts in the general fields of the language sciences. The first of the two analyses is a comparison of 30 recent abstracts from the French journal Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de linguistique de Paris and 30 abstracts from the

British serial, the Journal of Linguistics. As Swales (2004) notes, it is becoming increasingly difficult to control all the variables when making cross-linguistic comparisons between another research language and published English research writing. This is particularly the case in terms of audience size and distribution—and issue we take up in the discussion. However, the two journals do appear to be similar in other ways.

The Bulletin abstracts were drawn from the 2002 and 2003 volumes, while the Journal sub-corpus consists of RA abstracts published between March 2002 and July 2004, the wider time-frame required by the fact that the Journal publishes only three or four fulllength articles in each issue.

The second, more qualitative analysis is centered on the official journal $A S p$ of GERAS, Groupe d’Etude et de Recherche en Anglais de Spe´ cialite´ , which, as its name suggests, is an association of EAP/ESP experts in France. The journal is bilingual, and irrespective of whether the language of the article is French or English, each article is preceded by two abstracts, one in French, the other in English. Because of the presumed large amount of content similarity, these 30 abstract pairs written by the same individuals thus provide an enhanced opportunity for controlled comparison. We chose 15 articles written in French by Francophone authors and 15 articles written in English with author names connoting Anglophone status. Although using authors’ names to determine L1 status can be a hazardous procedure in a country like the USA, in France it is highly indicative. The majority of the articles in $A S p$ are written in French, so the 30 Francophone abstracts were all taken from the 1999 volume. In the Anglophone sub-corpus, we had to look a little further, taking nine from 1999, four from 1996 (the only two volumes available to us in their entirety), while the last two were obtained electronically from the 2002 volume. (A full list of the texts in the corpora can be obtained from the first author.)

Finally, we each independently coded the $3 0 ~ A S p$ abstract pairs, asking ourselves the dichotomous question: ‘‘Is one member of the pair essentially a translation of the other, or is it sufficiently different to function as a ‘reconceptualization’?’’ We separately identified eight of the latter, disagreeing on two and concurring on six. In these six cases, we contacted the authors by email in an attempt to obtain their own insights as to why they had conceptualized their abstracts differently.

# 3. Monolingual journals

The analysis of the abstracts in the two monolingual journals, Journal of Linguistics and Bulletin, Corpus A, was seen as preliminary exploration of potential linguistic and rhetorical differences between the part-genres in the two languages. These findings could then be used to enable us to identify some potentially salient features of the paired bilingual abstracts in the $A S p$ journal. The Journal of Linguistics instructs its authors to provide an abstract ‘‘of about 150 words’’; the Bulletin requires ‘‘un sommaire’’ of half a page at the maximum.

The choices of rhetorical schemata used in both groups of abstracts were closely comparable. While some of the abstracts in both journals followed an Introduction– Method–Results–Discussion/Conclusion (IMRD) structure, the majority of the abstracts were rhetorically centered around, in one sense or another, a theory: proposing, applying, creating, comparing, developing, criticizing, or expanding a theory. Take, for instance, the following skeletal example taken the Journal of Linguistics abstract for Jose´ Luis Gonza´ lez Escribano’s article ‘‘Head-final effects and the nature of modification’’:

In English and other languages, pre-modifiers must generally be head-final, whereas specifiers need not be [y]. The theory of modification defended here rests on a unified version of Merge [y] and claims that [y]. [T]his theory compares favorably with major alternatives like Kayne’s, Chomsky’s, Cinque’s or Ernst’s [y].

For many of these abstracts, the theory was used as a way of problem solving—finding an explanation for some language puzzle. Overall, the rhetorical frameworks used by both sets of abstracts did not differ significantly; in fact, the primary difference emerged in the way the present research was ‘‘situated’’ (i.e., Move 1 in Bittencourt dos Santos [1996], and Moves 1 and 2 in Hyland [2000]).

This act of situating research can be characterized as the manifestation of two potential elements: first, a justification of the research being undertaken—that is, an answer to the ‘‘why this research?’’ question; secondly, overt invocation of links to other research, via either general or specific references. The English abstracts for the most part take considerable pains to situate their research—both by answering the ‘‘why this research’’ question and by referencing other research (using both general references to other research and references to specific researchers, as the table shows). The French abstracts, however, much less frequently make an effort to justify their research and do not nearly as often reference other work. Table 1 gives a numerical indication of this substantial divergence.

We can see from the table that a little over $80 \%$ of the English abstracts answered the ‘‘why this research?’’ question, and $90 \%$ made some sort of research reference; on the other hand, only around $45 \%$ of the French abstracts attempted to explain why they are undertaking a certain research project, and only about $5 5 \%$ made reference to other work. It can also be noted that while 12 of the 17 English abstracts referencing a specific researcher include a citation, none of the nine specific French references offers a citation.

One possible explanation is that the French authors dedicate little space to discussing the merits of their research and the shortcomings of that of others because they are operating within a smaller academic community, in which there is less pressure to justify, defend, and ‘‘sell’’ research (Yakhontova, 2002). In contrast, according to Hyland (2000) research writers in English have been increasing the use of promotional elements in their abstracts, possibly in reaction to competitive pressures in leading journals (see also Hyland & Tse, 2005).

A further distinction in the way the two groups of abstracts present their research also calls into play Yakhontova’s (2002) ‘‘selling’’ versus ‘‘telling’’ distinction. Almost all of both abstract groups used at least one sentence with some sort of presentational element, for example a first person pronoun plus reporting verb, a metatextual expression such as ‘‘this paper’’ or ‘‘cet article’’ plus a reporting verb, or deictics like here or herein or ici. However, a difference was found in what Bittencourt dos Santos (1996) has described as a contrast between ‘‘purposive’’ and ‘‘descriptive’’ language. Purposive metadiscoursal statements, which overtly mark the research goal by, for example, use of expressions like ‘‘the goal of this research isy’’ or ‘‘this paper attemptsy’’ were used much more frequently in the French abstracts than in the English ones. In fact, only two of the English abstracts contained a purposive element, while fifteen of the French abstracts contain a sentence marked purposively. And here we need to make it clear that a purposive sentence is not the same as an answer to the ‘‘why this research?’’ question. Clarifying what the goal of a paper is by offering some sort of purposive thesis statement about the research topic itself is different from justifying why the research was undertaken. As a simplified example, it is entirely possible to provide a purposive statement such as ‘‘the goal of this paper is to show that $x$ is an adjective, not a determiner’’ without at all addressing the issue of why one might want to offer such a demonstration.

Table 1 Situating research in Journal of Linguistics and Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de linguistique de Paris   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td> Journal of Linguistics</td><td>Bulletin</td></tr><tr><td>Answer the &quot;why this research&#x27; question</td><td>25 (83%)</td><td>13 (43%)</td></tr><tr><td>Refer to other research.</td><td>27 (90%)</td><td>17 (56%)</td></tr><tr><td>In general</td><td>10</td><td>8</td></tr><tr><td>Specifically</td><td>17</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>Without citation</td><td>5</td><td>9</td></tr><tr><td>With citation</td><td>12</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>

In fact, this relatively minor difference in rhetorical strategy leads to the next step in our argument. According to Re´ gent (1985) and Bachschmidt (1999), French prose tends to place more emphasis on the ‘‘what,’’ while English prose looks more to the ‘‘why.’’ The French abstracts, with their proclivity for purposive elements, are essentially underscoring ‘‘Here is what this research attempts to do.’’ The English abstracts, with their focus on placing their research within the scope of previous research, instead argue ‘‘Here is why this research is important.’’ In other words, just as Re´ gent and Bachschimdt have argued, the English abstracts focus on arguing a point, while the French place more emphasis on giving data.

In addition to these diverging rhetorical features, we found at least two linguistic differences: one involving first person pronouns, the other, transition words. The French abstracts contained many fewer instances of first person pronoun use—15 total instances distributed over eight of the French abstracts, compared to 46 total pronouns distributed over 20 of the abstracts in Journal of Linguistics. Moreover, the French first person usage differs in an interesting way from that in the English abstracts. The English use of first person pronouns is apparently determined by the number of authors (a single author will use singular pronouns, and multiple authors will use plural pronouns); on the other hand, the French personal pronouns were entirely first person plural uses (e.g., nous/notre), even though all the abstracts were single-authored. Using exclusive plural pronouns in this way is now often thought to be old-fashioned in many Anglophone circles (Harwood, 2006), but apparently not in Francophone ones. However, as an anonymous reviewer points out, this may be changing in some fields, ‘‘where the emphasis is now on research as ‘inclusive’ of researchers and ‘participants’ (not ‘subjects’) and where the plural pronoun is preferred as a symbol of the research being a group endeavor, not the result of detached analysis by a trained researcher as separate from the objects of analysis.’’

Some interesting differences were observed in transition word usage in Corpus A. The three main types, along with some examples, are shown in Table 2.

The uptake of these sentence connector options is, however, quite different in the two sub-corpora. Table 3 shows the distribution.

As can be seen, the majority of the French transition words $( 6 1 \% )$ fell into the addition/ enumeration category, while the most common transition function-type in the English subcorpus was contrast/concession (just under $50 \%$ ). Conversely, only $1 6 \%$ of the transitions used in the French abstracts express contrast or concession, while only $2 6 \%$ of the English group’s transitions express addition or enumeration. Similar findings in Bachschmidt (1999) reinforce the idea that French prose acts as a sort of unrolling of facts (andyandyandy), while the stronger contrastive flavor in the English sub-corpus can be aligned with English authors’ concern to justify their contributions by indicating gaps in the prior research record. Further, Golebiowski (2006) argues that ‘‘European’’ writers tend to use more coordinating constructions in contrast to the ‘‘Anglos’’ with their preferences for subordination. And here it is relevant to point out that Fløttum (2005), discussing economics RAs, finds that English texts make more frequent use of contrast/ concession markers than do French ones.

Table 2 Types of transition words in Journal of Linguistics and Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de linguistique de Paris   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Type</td><td>English</td><td>French</td></tr><tr><td>Addition/enumeration</td><td>Also, as well as, first, second, third</td><td>de plus, d&#x27;abord</td></tr><tr><td>Contrast/concession</td><td>However, whereas, despite, although</td><td>pourtant, tandis que, bien que.</td></tr><tr><td>Cause/effect</td><td>Therefore, thus, because, since.</td><td>donc, alors, parce que, car.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Table 3 Transition words in Journal of Linguistics and Bulletin de la Socie´te´ de linguistique de Paris   

<html><body><table><tr><td></td><td> Journal of linguistics</td><td>Bulletin</td></tr><tr><td>Addition</td><td>16</td><td>41</td></tr><tr><td>Contrast/concession</td><td>29</td><td>11</td></tr><tr><td>Cause/effect</td><td>11</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>Other</td><td>3</td><td>5</td></tr></table></body></html>

In sum, this preliminary exploration of the abstracts in the two monolingual journals suggests some areas where significant differences in the rhetorical and linguistic features of French and English abstracts might be expected to occur. On the one hand, some of these effects might be attributable to publishing pressure and discourse community size, and, on the other, some to the deductive, data- and fact-based nature of French prose and the inductive, argument-based nature of English prose. On this basis, therefore, we now turn to the paired bilingual abstracts in Corpus B, i.e., the $A S p$ sub-corpus.

# 4. Asp overview

One major difference between the $A S p$ abstracts and the monolingual abstracts lies in the fact that the monolingual journals do not, for the most part, deal with issues of language from a cross-cultural or cross-linguistic perspective and are created for audiences which may be monolingual. On the other hand, $A S p$ is created for a bi/multilingual audience and often deals directly with issues of linguistic, rhetorical, and cultural differences across languages. Secondly, the authors of the $A S p$ abstracts can, for the most part, be considered bilingual themselves. Since they are all ESP experts, even the nonnative English speakers are, almost certainly, at least proficient speakers and writers of

English. And since most of the authors contributing to $A S p$ , including the Anglophone authors, according to information from biodata and informants in France, have lived and worked in France or some Francophone country for a good portion of their lives, one can assume that their French is at least proficient. Taking these facts into account, we see that the results of the $A S p$ corpus are most likely to show us, instead of areas where speakers of one language produce infelicities when writing in another language, areas of potentially significant difference between English and French text—in our case specifically in the article abstracts. The editorial instructions state ‘‘Le texte sera obligatoirement pre´ ce´ de´ [y] d’un re´ sume´ d’une quinzaine de lignes maximum, dans l’une et l’autre langue’’ (The text must be preceded by an abstract of 15 lines maximum, in each language).

Based in part on the trends identified in our review of the monolingual abstracts, we first conducted a general linguistic and rhetorical analysis of the $A S p$ abstract pairs. In one respect, we soon noted the two corpora exhibiting a similar trend. Although the French abstracts use more personal pronouns in total than the English (in contrast to the monolingual abstracts), the same use of plural pronouns to refer to single authors is observable. Indeed, only five of the 55 total pronouns (32 French, 23 English) are singular and these five occur in only two abstract pairs, both of which written by Anglophone authors. As it turned out, most single Anglophone authors opted for plural personal pronouns and were apparently adopting this French habit and applying it not only to their French prose but to their English abstracts as well.

However, it is not surprising that the $A S p$ abstract pairs did not in general exhibit the same large scale differences observed in Corpus A. For example, use of transition words does not differ across languages with any observable pattern. This is probably due to the content similarity, and in some cases a more ‘‘direct’’ style of translation constraining use and range. In addition to the categories observed in the monolingual journal abstracts, a few additional features emerged as indicating English and French difference. One striking example is the use of passive constructions: the English abstracts employ a greater amount of passive voice than their French partners. Indeed, nearly $70 \%$ of all uses of passive voice observed in the $A S p$ corpus occur in the English abstracts. In fact, there are 31 instances of a finite clause appearing as passive in English but active in French (with only two counterexamples). These changes were made by both Francophone and Anglophone authors. It looks as though voice preference is a distinguishing feature of the two languages, perhaps because of the greater facility in French for using reflexive and impersonal (‘‘on’’) verb constructions (Baker, 1992). As an anonymous reviewer noted at this juncture, ‘‘The role of culture is important but syntax is an especially rigid component of language, and no cultural shift can change that, at least not radically and certainly not over a short period of time.’’

# 5. Detailed examination of two ASp abstract pairs

At the end of Section 3 Data Sources, we noted that we had concurred that six of the 30 abstract pairs appeared to be very different, and, therefore, not obviously translations one of the other. We also mentioned that we contacted the authors of these six by e-mail in an attempt to get their own perspectives as to what had been going on. We received four substantive replies to our queries, but, for reasons of space, we deal with just two of the case studies here.

The first pair of abstracts comes from Catherine Resche, an ESP expert and full-time Professor at a university in Paris. The two published abstracts appear below (sentence numbers have been added for ease of reference).

‘‘Un re´ seau de voies d’acce\` s a\` la langue spe´ cialise´ e en anglais L2’’ (1) Enseigner l’anglais dans le secteur LANSAD ne doit pas perdre de vue la langue ge´ ne´ rale dans laquelle la langue spe´ cialise´ e est enracine´ e, meˆ me s’il est e´ vident qu’il faut s’attacher a\` donner aux e´ tudiants la possibilite´ d’aborder un secteur spe´ cialise´ et d’en maıˆ triser les moyens d’expression. (2) La pre´ sente e´ tude passe pre´ cise´ ment en revue plusieurs techniques qui sont autant de voies d’acce\` s a\` la langue spe´ cialise´ e: d’abord, la lecture, voie privile´ gie´ e pour aborder les textes spe´ cialise´ s dans de bonnes conditions et ame´ liorer leur compre´ hension, puis l’approche terminologique, et son comple´ ment naturel, la phrase´ ologie. (3) Cette e´ tude des notions et des collocations qui tissent une toile autour des termes noyaux doit eˆ tre comple´ te´ e par un examen de la syntaxe, qui permet de souligner les formes privile´ gie´ es par la langue spe´ cialise´ e. (4) Enfin, la dimension culturelle aide, au travers de l’initiation a\` l’observation des ne´ ologismes, des dictions et proverbes, des nombreux re´ seaux de me´ taphores, sans oublier les re´ fe´ rences a\` la litte´ rature, a\` souligner que l’e´ tude de la langue spe´ cialise´ e n’est pas aussi re´ ductrice et re´ barbative que certains voudraient le faire croire.

‘‘A network of access routes to specialized language in L2 English’’ (1) It is now widely acknowledged that ESP should not be considered as a sublanguage for it is deeply-rooted in general-purpose English indeed. (2) Teaching ESP therefore implies a wide range of access routes, which the present paper offers to explore. (3) Its first focus, reading, is examined from different angles; bottom-up, top-down and interactive approaches are thus reviewed. (4) Then, terminology and phraseology are dealt with, the former in terms of an organized network of notions and the latter as a set of potential collocates that build a web around the core units. (5) However, the analysis would not be complete if the syntactic forms privileged by Esp [sic] were not investigated. (6) Finally, through the study of neologisms, proverbs, metaphors and various references to literature, the cultural dimension is emphasized with a view to proving that considering ESP as a mere series of technical words to be mastered would be giving an oversimplified, biased, and unfair view of what it really is.

An immediate difference is that the English version contains two more sentences, even though it is actually somewhat shorter than the French version (160 words as opposed to 189). As a result, the sentences in English are shorter and less complex, as can be seen by comparing S3 and S4 in English to S2 in French. Another general difference is that the English version makes much greater use of the passive voice (eight instances in total) than the French version (only two instances). Both of these findings may in fact be typical of Francophone and Anglophone prose and not, therefore, genre-specific.

Examining the abstract at a closer level shows the differences in S1 to be quite striking. In English, the sentence starts out ‘‘It is now widely acknowledged that,’’ this formulaic opening clause thus situating the research within what is generally accepted within the French EAP discourse community. The opening to the French text invokes ‘‘teaching’’ (Enseigner l’anglais), therefore falling in line with our previous comments about the difference in research-situating techniques used in each language. Secondly, the second half of S1 (‘‘meˆ me s’il est e´ vident qu’il faut s’attacher a\` donner aux e´ tudiants la possibilite´ d’aborder un secteur spe´ cialise´ et d’en maıˆ triser les moyens d’expression/even if it is evident that it is necessary to attempt to give students the possibility of tackling a specialized sector and mastering its means of expression’’) expresses a connection to the real world—to the actual people in need of assistance or improved resources. The first sentence in the French text thus situates the current research within a social and educational context, whereas the corresponding sentence in English situates the research within a more academic context. In other words, the opening to the French version is practitioner-oriented, while that of the English version is more research-oriented.

So by the time we get to the French S2 we are beginning to expect that these ‘‘voies d’acce\` s’’ (access routes) are being explored in order to help actual students gain access to ‘‘privileged’’ forms of discourse (ESP in this case). The English abstract does not give that impression; in fact, there is no mention of ‘‘students,’’ at all. We can also see in the French S2 a reference to students by the use of the possessive pronoun leur. The English version (S3) opts instead to expatiate on the analytical procedures used in examining ‘‘reading.’’

The general sense is that, according to the French abstract, the paper will show how to bring more appropriate assistance to those who may struggle with specialized discourse, whereas in the English abstract there is emphasis on giving the best possible definition of the phenomenon (ESP). In the English abstract an attempt is made to discuss the analytical procedures used—‘‘bottom-up, top-down and interactive’’ (S3), but this is missing from the French version, for which, according to Resche, there are no French equivalents. Finally, the English version (S6) closes with ‘‘considering ESP as a mere series of technical words,’’ that is, considering it in what the author views to be a conventional French way, ‘‘would be giving an oversimplified, biased, and unfair view of what it really is’’. In the French version, there is an implication that other people, generically described as ‘‘certains,’’ are in some way responsible for what the author believes is an inadequacy in the current treatment of ESP. There is, in effect, an implication that these ‘‘certains’’ intend to cling to beliefs that may no longer be valid, a notion which is expressed by the conditional phrase ‘‘voudraient le faire croire.’’ (‘‘would have it believed’’). This adds up to a fairly direct critique of other, if unnamed, researchers. In the English version, this type of personal criticism does not occur; the same author simply takes issue with the faulty definition itself. On the last point, Martı´ n-Martı´ n and Burgess (2004) found something very similar for Spanish and English abstracts.

We then contacted Dr. Resche to see if she could provide some additional insight. We asked Resche for any recollection she had of her rationale for rethinking the Anglophone abstract (Resche clarified that she did indeed write the French version first, and that it is her usual custom to write the first abstract in the same language the article is written in). She responded by saying, ‘‘My choices were more felt than reasoned. I just sensed that I could not translate word for word, as the English version would turn out to be very artificial.’’ She went on to clarify what she views as one salient difference between French and English: ‘‘The traditional French sentence is longer, contains more clauses, is built more like a Latin sentence, while the English version is somehow dictated by pragmatic considerations. [y] Anglo-Saxon readers are more practical-minded and are likely to be interested in a more direct, less flowery style in an abstract.’’ In response to a question about the reasoning behind her specific changes, Resche pointed out that she has switched the order of the first two sentences: ‘‘My point, I guess, was to make shorter sentences in English and to translate the ideas, not the words.’’ She further clarifies, ‘‘In the English abstract I tend to give priority to the ‘rheme,’ emphasizing reading terminology and phraseology [y] and using the passive voice.’’ But she does not follow a specific set of guidelines:

I have no one-size-fits-all strategy [y] my choices are not consciously dictated by specific recommendations [y] I am conscious that I do not think and reason in the same way or along the same logical lines when I think in French or in English. I guess that I also bear the Anglo-Saxon target reader in mind.

We now report on the second case study—Jean-Louis Vidalenc’s two short abstracts for a 1999 article. Vidalenc has been teaching ESP in France since 1975 and is currently a full professor at Aix–Marseille. The abstracts appear below and discussion follows.

Faisabilite´ d’un enseignement a\` distance de phe´ nome\` nes lexicaux et syntaxiques: analyse d’un corpus de documents internet pre´ sentant un des traitements du cancer de la prostate.

(1) Cet article propose quelques pistes exploratoires d’un enseignement par courrier e´ lectronique appuye´ sur un site internet [sic] permettant a\` des cance´ reux d’avoir acce\` s a\` la documentation e´ lectronique des CHU d’Outre Atlantique et de correspondre avec d’autres malades. (2) La cre´ ativite´ lexicale et l’emploi a\` la limite des points de grammaire, explicables par la situation d’urgence des auteurs de message ne permet pas de se contenter des solutions les plus courantes en formation des adultes mais fournit au linguiste une aire d’observation pertinente pour e´ tudier l’e´ volution lexicale et grammaticale.

Feasibility of a distance course on lexical and syntactic phenomena: analysis of a corpus of internet documents presenting a treatment of prostate cancer (1) This paper discusses some basic features of an on line course in English medical terminology and the English syntax used on the web, which might help FrenchSpeaking Prostate Cancer Patients to understand the relevant medical information available on the internet. (2) The above-average emotional involvement of electronic messages dealing with cancer makes such a course quite a challenge for traditional adult education teaching methods. (3) The linguist will find this corpus relevant for the study of the evolution of lexical and syntactical phenomena.

First, it can again be pointed out that the French version of the abstract is slightly longer than the English version and yet has fewer sentences (two as opposed to three). Again, the first sentences of these two abstracts (‘‘Cet article propose quelques pistes exploratoires’’ and ‘‘This paper discusses some basic features’’) show some divergence, but this time in the choices of reporting verbs and their complements. The reporting verb in the French text is fairly assertive (propose in contrast to, say, sugge\`re), while the English choice is descriptive. Further, the complements of the verbs are different in the two versions. In French, we find a non-committal ‘‘quelques pistes exploratoires/some exploratory forays’’ while in the English it is the summative ‘‘some basic features.’’

The French version also clarifies that, in addition to being able to gain information about cancer, the ‘‘cance´ reux’’ will be able to communicate with other people diagnosed with cancer. This is not specified in the English version, which instead focuses more on the opportunity for patients to learn more about their disease—perhaps further evidence of a more developed social context in the French abstracts.

The later sentences (S2 in the French version and S2 and S3 in the English version) also exhibit interesting contrasts in the impressions they engender. In the English version, the cancer patients are treated as people who might welcome a little extra assistance since they are facing messages with ‘‘above-average emotional involvement.’’ The French version, on the other hand, makes no mention of helping anyone, the course being described as ‘‘permettant’’ access to information. Further, there is no mention of ‘‘emotional involvement’’ in the French version rather of ‘‘la situation d’urgence.’’ We can also see that the language in S2 of the French version uses somewhat stronger language than the English equivalent. In the French version, the situation of urgency ‘‘ne permet pas de se contenter des solutions les plus courantes,’’ (‘‘doesn’t permit one to be satisfied with the most current solutions’’), an overt enough critical stance. The language in the English version is softer, simply presenting the course as ‘‘a challenge for traditional adult education methods.’’ All in all, the salient differences are found in the tone or attitude the author adopts when summarizing the upcoming paper. In English the patients are described delicately, in need of help; not so in the French version, where they are described as capable, agentive people who can take care of themselves. The English is emotion-based, while the French is largely non-emotional.

As with Resche, Vidalenc is quite aware of the fact that he has not directly translated the two abstracts: ‘‘The English version is definitely not a translation,’’ he wrote in response to our queries. ‘‘The idea was to write something which might be read by an ESP specialist and/or a member of the Prostate Cancer Community.’’ He responded to our inquiry about differences in his texts by telling us that in writing the English abstract (which was written after the French abstract) he ‘‘imagined I was trying to explain the purpose of the article to ESP colleagues.’’ He also suggested that his way of writing the English abstract may have been influenced by the subject itself: ‘‘A more personal reason may be in the way I cope with [prostate cancer]. The stratum of English used by members of the [prostate cancer] community, even docs, journalists and academics, has little in common with the English suggested by some editors of scientific journals.’’

# 6. Discussion

In this paper we have explored a small subset of the many language science abstracts published each year as encapsulations of—and sometimes advertisements for—their accompanying articles. This subset has been specifically designed to explore similarities and differences between French and English practice in this area, especially since discourse-analytic work on French written academic genres has been surprisingly sparse. The subset is relatively small (60 abstracts in each language), and the language sciences as broadly conceived is noted for its wide array of methodologies and approaches. Given both the restricted sample and the complex universe of discourse from which it has been drawn, any conclusions must necessarily be tentative.

That said, we can tease out certain saliencies from the findings and provisionally attribute them to sources and origins. The longer French sentences and the greater use of passives in English can be attributed to differences in the stylistic conventions and linguistic resources. On the other hand, it seems reasonable to suggest that the English espousal of ‘‘I’’ and French preference for ‘‘nous’’ in single-authored abstracts has little to do with stylistics per se, but more to do with cultural expectations as to what constitutes appropriate formal academic style, particularly with regard to how an author is expected to refer to herself or himself (see Fløttum, 2003) for more detailed discussion of this issue).

However, when we begin to explore differences in rhetorical orientation, particularly in terms of how authors project or situate their research, a rather different kind of interpretation comes into focus. Although we earlier claimed a certain equivalence between the Journal and the Bulletin, we suspect that the readership of the former is, in fact, considerably larger and considerably more international. At this juncture, it may be useful to recall Jean-Louis Vidalenc’s decision to rewrite his abstract in order to appeal to a wider Anglophone audience. The differences then at this level, particularly with regard to more overt attempts in the English versions to situate the abstracts within a wider academic context, can best be aligned with factors of audience design. Indeed, Martı´ n-Martı´ n (2002) finds a comparable difference in orientation between his English and Spanish social scientists. In this regard, differences of this kind do not provide support for those who would look for cross-linguistic explanations, but rather for those who would look for sociological ones. In other words, such findings are most clearly understandable by reference to the size and professional maturity of the target discourse communities, as indeed already argued by Ahmad (1997) for Malay, by Fredrickson and Swales (1994) for Swedish, and, most tellingly, by Burgess (2002) for Spanish.

At this point, some further thoughts about the methodologies used in the three exploratory studies may be useful. In the first study, we compared abstracts from a leading UK linguistics journal written in English and a leading linguistics journal written in French from Paris. At first sight, this looks like a good basis for comparison because of the surface similarities between the texts, both sets of texts being written by experts in their fields and experts in their own academic languages. Indeed, this is the type of position adopted by Connor and Moreno (2005) in their search for ‘‘maximum similarity’’ between two corpora. However, it is unclear whether this stress on the comparability of the textual product does not disguise potentially significant differences in the processes leading to putatively similar products, nor indeed to the subsequent reception histories of those textual products. The Journal of Linguistics is the official organ of the Linguistics Association of Great Britain, whose members receive copies at a greatly reduced rate. The journal is found in libraries worldwide, and it can be expected that competition for space is high, the review and editing processes arduous, and the kudos for publishing therein considerable. None of these factors would seem to apply to a similar extent to the Bulletin. As Swales (2004) points out, it is increasingly doubtful whether viable comparisons can be made between ‘‘big’’ English-language journals and ‘‘small’’ ones publishing in other languages. In retrospect, therefore, it would have been better to have selected a much less prestigious English language linguistics journal in our attempts to find a true ‘‘maximum similarity.’’

In the second study, we compared bilingual abstracts form the $A S p$ journal. This methodological technique clearly achieves a much closer equivalence than in the first study. But it may overachieve it. After all, one of the paired abstracts has inevitably to be written first, and thus is likely to have a penumbral effect on the second. Recall that we estimated that 24 of the 30 pairs looked like translations of the other, thus producing relatively little useful information about rhetorical and stylistic differences between academic French and English usage in this part-genre. For the $20 \%$ that we adjudged to be reconceptualizations, we did indeed find interestingly different ways of constructing the abstracts, but the amount of data remaining available for comparison has been considerably reduced.

In the third study, we followed up with e-mail exchanges with four of the six reconceptualizing authors (two did not respond in detail to our overtures). The use of textbased interviews is now quite common (Casanave, 1995; Hyland, 2000) and obviously adds some further perspective. One option here is to use insiders from the field to comment generally on texts from that field; the other is to question informants about their own texts. Like us, Harwood in a recent study of personal pronoun use in academic prose, selected the second option. He notes:

How can we minimize the possibility that informants will say that they use pronouns in one way but in reality use them in another? How can we minimize the possibility that informants may not be sufficiently aware of how they use pronouns to be capable of talking about them in sufficient detail. The solution clearly lies in getting writers to talk about their pronoun use with reference to their own writing. (2006, pp. 429–430)

Maybe so, but the second author of this paper, who has been interviewed several times about his writing, would confess to a further possibility—a tendency, in these mental retrospective reconstructions, to rhetorically embellish or over-intellectualize the thought processes presumed to have taken place at the time of writing. And perhaps we see a little of that in the two case studies we have presented.

It turns out, therefore, that the methodology of comparing academic English and another academic language needs careful thought, especially if sufficiently large-scale studies are being attempted so as to generate generalizable findings. Under these conditions, exploratory studies using a variety of approaches, such as those presented here, have their own roles to play.

Both Resche and Vidalenc have emphasized how difficult it is to pin down precisely what makes academic writing in English different from academic writing in French. However, we believe that our detailed textual analyses of their abstracts as well as their own perceptions shed some useful light on how and why certain alternative ways of writing have developed. Indeed, the three levels of difference we have identified (linguistic, cultural, sociological) could have some fairly immediate pedagogical uptake, not only for Francophones writing abstracts in English, but also for Anglophones attempting French abstracts to accompany their papers for an estimable journal such as $A S p$ . In the end, however, as Breivega, Dahl, and Fløttum (2002) observe, the linguistic and rhetorical manifestations of national cultural identities remain complex and elusive. More specifically, Kramsch and Thorne (2002) note that ‘‘because we tend to take our genres for natural and universal (Fairclough, 1992), we don’t realize the local flavor they bring to the global medium’’ (p. 99). Certainly, here we have tried to elucidate the local flavor of language science abstracts from two major academic communities.

# Acknowledgments

We would like to thank Marie-He´ le\` ne Fries, David Rees, Catherine Resche, and JeanLouis Vidalenc for their thoughtful and insightful email messages. Thanks also to Annelie Adel for detailed comments on a draft of this manuscript and to our three anonymous reviewers for their thoughtful evaluations of the paper.

# References

Ahmad, U. K. (1997). Research article introductions in Malay: Rhetoric in an emerging research community. In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 273–303). Berlin: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Bachschmidt, P. (1999). Construction de l’argumentation dans l’article de recherche en me´ chanique, diffe´ rences entre discours du francophone et de l’anglophone. ASp, 23– 26, 197–207.   
Baker, M. (1992). In other words: A coursebook on translation. London: Routledge.   
Banks, D. (1999). Becoming part of the network: French scientists and the use of English at conferences. ASp, 23– 26, 209–217.   
Birch, S. (1996). French researchers publishing in English: An analysis of a corpus of first drafts. ASp, 11– 14, 75–88.   
Bittencourt dos Santos, M. (1996). The textual organization of research paper abstracts in applied linguistics. Text, 16, 481–499.   
Breivega, K. R., Dahl, T., & Fløttum, K. (2002). Traces of self and others in research articles. A comparative pilot study of English, French and Norwegian research articles in medicine, economics and linguistics. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 12, 218–239.   
Burgess, S. (2002). Packed houses and intimate gatherings: Audience and rhetorical structure. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 196–215). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.   
Casanave, C. P. (1995). Local interactions: Constructing contexts for composing in a graduate sociology program. In D. Belcher, & G. Braine (Eds.), Academic writing in a second language: Essays on research and pedagogy (pp. 83–110). Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Chan, S. K., & Foo, S. (2004). Interdisciplinary perspectives on abstracts for information retrieval. Ibe´rica, 8, 101–124.   
Connor, U., & Moreno, A. (2005). Tertium comparationis: A vital component in contrastive rhetoric research. In P. Bruthiaux, D. Atkinson, W. Eggington, W. Grabe, & V. Ramanathan (Eds.), Directions in applied linguistics (pp. 153–164). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Cronin, B. (2003). Scholarly communication and epistemic cultures. The New Review of Academic Librarianship, 1, 1–24.   
Dahl, T. (2004). Some characteristics of argumentative abstracts. Akademisk Prosa, 2, 49–67.   
Fløttum, K. (2003). Personal English, indefinite French and plural Norwegian scientific authors? Pronominal author manifestation in research articles. Norsk Lingvistisk Tidsskrift, 21, 21–55.   
Fløttum, K. (2005). The self and others: Polyphonic visibility in research articles. International Journal of Applied Linguistics, 15, 29–45.   
Fløttum, K., Dahl, T., & Kinn, T. (2006). Academic voices. Amsterdam: John Benjamins Publishing Company.   
Fløttum, K., & Rastier, F. (Eds.). (2003). Academic discourse. Multidisciplinary approaches. Oslo: Novus.   
Fredrickson, K. M., & Swales, J. M. (1994). Competition and discourse community: Introductions from ‘‘Nysvenska Studier’’. In B.-L. Gunnarsson, P. Linell, & B. Nordberg (Eds.), Text and talk in professional contexts (pp. 9–22). Uppsala: ASLA.   
Golebiowski, Z. (2006). The distribution of discoursal salience in research papers: Relational hypotaxis and parataxis. Discourse Studies, 8, 259–278.   
Graetz, N. (1985). Teaching EFL students to extract structural information from abstracts. In J. M. Ulign, & A. K. Pugh (Eds.), Reading for professional purposes: Methods and materials in teaching languages (pp. 123–135). Leuven: Acco.   
Hartley, J. (1994). Three ways to improve the clarity of journal abstracts. British Journal of Educational Psychology, 64, 331–343.   
Hartley, J. (1999). Applying ergonomics to Applied Ergonomics: Using structured abstracts. Applied Ergonomics, 30, 535–541.   
Harwood, N. (2006). (In)appropriate personal pronoun use in political science: A qualitative study and a proposed heuristic for future research. Written Communication, 23, 424–450.   
Hyland, K. (2000). Disciplinary discourses: Social interactions in academic writing. London: Longman.   
Hyland, K., & Tse, P. (2005). Hooking the reader: A corpus study of evaluative that in abstracts. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 123–139.   
Johns, T. (1992). It is presented initially: Linear dislocation & inter-language strategies in Brazilian academic abstracts in English and Portuguese. Ilha do Desterro, 27, 9–32.   
Jordan, M. P. (1991). The linguistic genre of abstracts. In A. D. Volpe (Ed.), The seventeenth LACUS forum (pp. 507–527). Lake Bluff, IL: Linguistic Association of Canada and the United States.   
Kramsch, C., & Thorne, S. L. (2002). Foreign language learning as a global communicative practice. In D. Block, & D. Cameron (Eds.), Globalization and language teaching (pp. 83–100). London: Routledge.   
Lore´ s, R. (2004). On RA abstracts: From rhetorical structure to thematic organization. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 280–302.   
Martı´ n-Martı´ n, P. (2002). A genre-based investigation of abstract writing in English and Spanish. Revista Canaria de Estudios Ingleses, 44, 47–64.   
Martı´ n-Martı´ n, P., & Burgess, S. (2004). The rhetorical management of academic criticism in research article abstracts. Text, 24, 171–195.   
Melander, B., Swales, J. M., & Fredrickson, K. M. (1997). Journal abstracts from three academic fields in the United States and Sweden: national or disciplinary proclivities? In A. Duszak (Ed.), Culture and styles of academic discourse (pp. 251–272). New York: Mouton de Gruyter.   
Montesi, M., & Urdiciain, B. G. (2005). Recent linguistics research into author abstracts. Knowledge Organization, 32, 64–78.   
Nwogu, K. N. (1990). Discourse variation in medical texts: Schema, theme and cohesion on professional and journalistic accounts. (Monographs in Systemic Linguistics, 2). Nottingham, UK: University of Nottingham.   
Ra¨ isa¨ nen, C. (1999). The conference forum as a system of genres. Gothenburg: Acta Universitatis Gothoburgensis.   
Re´ gent, O. (1985). A comparative approach to the learning of specialized written discourse. In P. Riley (Ed.), Discourse and learning: Papers in applied linguistics and language learning from the Centre de Recherches et d’Applications Pe´dagogiques en Langues (pp. 105–120). New York: Longman.   
Salager-Meyer, F. (1990). Discourse flaws in medical English abstracts: A genre analysis per research- and texttype. Text, 10, 365–384.   
Samraj, B. (2002). Disciplinary variation in abstracts: The case of wildlife behaviour and conservation biology. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 40–56). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.   
Swales, J. M. (2004). Research genres: Explorations and applications. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J. M., & Feak, C. (2000). English in today’s research world: A writing guide. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.   
Teufel, S., Moens, M. (2000, October). What’s yours and what’s mine: Determining intellectual attribution in scientific text. Paper presented at the 2000 Joint SIGDAT Conference on Empirical Methods in NLP and Very Large Corpora, Hong Kong.   
Ventola, E. (1994). Abstracts as an object of linguistic study. In S. Cmejrkova´ , F. Danes, & E. Havlova´ (Eds.), Writing vs. speaking: Language, text, discourse, communication (pp. 333–352). Tu¨ bingen: Gunter Narr.   
Yakhontova, T. (2002). ‘Selling’ or ‘telling’? The issue of cultural variation in research genres. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic discourse (pp. 216–232). Harlow, UK: Pearson Education.