# Toward the ethnography of argumentation: A response to Richard Andrews’ ‘Models of argumentation in educational discourse’

PAUL PRIOR

# Abstract

This paper is a response to Richard Andrews’ ‘Models of argumentation in educational discourse’, particularly to his suggestion that argument studies should turn to ethnography to understand better how argumentation is taught, learned, and deployed. The response notes that Toulmin’s model of argument (claim, data, warrant, etc.) and his theory of argumentation have called for such attention since the 1950s; however, the educational reception of the model (whether for instruction, assessment, or research) has largely ignored the sociocultural dimensions of Toulmin’s work and treated the model as a generic heuristic. In fact, a great deal of work relevant to a new ethnography of argumentation has already been undertaken in a variety of sociocultural settings. This paper reviews examples of such studies and argues that they point to a pressing need to move beyond analysis of argumentative artifacts (whether texts, films, music, photographs, monuments, or whatever) to analysis of people’s embodied, collaborative, and distributed activity in complexly laminated fields of practice.

Keywords: argumentation; discourse analysis; ethnography of communication; rhetoric; social practice; writing.

# 1. Introduction

Richard Andrews has provided a state-of-the-art assessment of the field of argument and argumentation with an orientation to education. The continuum he sketches from abstract, generic logic at one extreme to situated rhetorical action at the other is an apt metric. A particular strength of his treatment here is his review of multiple models: two versions of Toulmin (1958; Toulmin et al. 1984), Mitchell and Riddle’s (2000) since–then– because model, Andrews’ (1995) own interesting adaptation to argumentation of Vygotsky’s (1987) developmental account of concept formation, and finally Kaufer and Geisler’s (1991) main-path/faulty-path model, which matches problem-solving processes in the process of inquiry and composing to their textualized representations. Andrews sketches a reasonable balance sheet of what each o¤ers and does not, how each might best be used, without picking a single preferred model. As Spiro, Feltovich, Coulson, and Anderson (1989) have argued, in ill-structured and complex domains, multiple metaphors/models are likely to o¤er the richest representations, the best bases for thought and action. Argumentation is certainly an ill-structured, messy domain, so Andrews’ qualified endorsement of multiple models for multiple purposes is a well-motivated stance. Most important from my perspective is Andrew’s concluding call for anthropological studies of argument, for rich descriptions of how argument(ation) is represented and choreographed in diverse settings. (Roughly following Andrews, I intend to use ‘argumentation’ to refer to the total process, ‘argument’ to refer to the metagenre or some specific semiotic artifact realizing it, and ‘argument(ation)’ to refer to either or both simultaneously.) I will structure the remainder of my comments around this call for anthropological studies. I do so in part to point to the abundance of relevant research already published that describes situated argumentative practices, in part to explore why this research has not been widely registered in studies of argument, and in part to consider how this research challenges the conventional assumptions and framings of argument theory.

# 2. Rechoreographing Toulmin

Andrews o¤ers up the metaphor of choreography to point to the practices of argumentation. Choreography suggests action (argumentation), not only text or genre (argument). It suggests a performance-oriented model, perhaps with multiple participants playing varied roles on stage and behind it. It suggests an audience, some of whom may leave the performance and respond with reviews or even with creative work that in some sense answers the performance. Choreography also implies study and rehearsal. It may be an especially timely metaphor, given current interest in visual argument, as choreography conventionally involves visual as well as verbal representations. As a metaphor for argument(ation) then, choreography could signal the kind of broad view that Becker (1982) proposed in his sociological account of art worlds. However, choreography is also susceptible to more limited readings, in which dancers execute the (textual) plan of the choreographer. This kind of abstract formalist reading is, in fact, likely given the continued, strong, formal-textual bias in argument studies.

Where might choreography lead argument studies? Perhaps one way to begin to answer this question is to look more closely at the practices behind the metaphor. Shipka (2004) describes how Mu‰e, a student majoring in dance, fulfilled a freshman composition course assignment by arranging to have the class represented through dance. Shipka notes that Mu‰e’s goal was not to entertain, but to make two arguments: that dance can be an e¤ective means of representation and that, consciously or not, everyone is always ‘dancing’ through their movements and postures. After videotaping a meeting of the class, she called around to recruit a group of improvisational dancers. The dancers met and watched the videotapes, each making choices of who to re-present, a decision made in part to align the dancer’s own physical characteristics and personality (as a dancer) with those of the student. In an interview, Mu‰e explained these choices:

Amanda is really, really small and tiny . . . in her movement . . . and seamless. She’s not a very loud dancer so we gave her Courtney who is pretty quiet and doesn’t really move that much on the video . . . Whereas like Mimi, you know, will go perfect with Ana, who is a loud and huge dancer and not afraid to like, whatever—you know? (Shipka 2004: 6)

Here then we hear a bit of practical choreographing, tuned to a particular school-sponsored task but also to personal goals, attentive to the a¤ordances and constraints of the situation, including those of the bodies of the dancers and those they would mime. Shipka’s account of Mu‰e’s rhetorical and embodied choices then begins to point the way toward a rechoreographing of Toulmin, one in which complex embodied sociohistoric practice is put at center stage.

The reception of Toulmin’s work, however, o¤ers a clear image of the bias to verbal-textual arguments. As Lunsford (2002) has highlighted, from its original articulation in 1958, Toulmin’s theory encompassed two basic dimensions. The first dimension, captured in the familiar diagram, is what Toulmin (1958) identified as the field-independent character of argument, the generic laying out of claim, data, warrant, qualification, backing, and rebuttal. The second dimension is essentially cultural: the historical development of social formations (the fields, professions, disciplines); the historical development of concepts; newcomers’ apprenticeship into those social formations and their appropriation of those concepts; and the locally situated emergence of a specific argument. It is only the first of these dimensions that has been taken up in instructional materials and assessment rubrics (where Toulmin has frequently been used as a normative model to assess the quality of arguments). This onesided uptake is perhaps not surprising given the relative clarity of the diagram, its intentionally close association with everyday terms for arguments, and the formal-textual bias of philosophy, especially in areas of logic. However, it is surprising, given that the fundamental core of Toulmin’s theory is the sociohistoric dimension. The entire raison d’etre of his approach is the view that field-dependent histories of thought and reasoning animate all of the generic terms, that those histories alone are able to define something as a claim, as data, as warrant or rebuttal, that they alone provide the largely tacit backing that members of some community share. It was for this reason that Toulmin argued that the decontextualization of logic was a mark of its sheer irrelevance.

In place of logic, Toulmin (1958) pursued the very Wittgensteinian project of fleshing out the varied ways arguments confuse us by their apparent uniformity, pointing repeatedly to the di¤erent language games and forms of life behind similar-appearing statements. Toulmin noted, for example, the di¤erent senses of, and the di¤erent rational practices that would evaluate, statements that someone cannot: lift a ton single handedly, get a thousand people into a town hall, talk about a fox’s tail at a British hunt, smoke in a nonsmoking compartment, turn a child away without a shilling, force a defendant’s spouse to testify against him/her, or find a rational number that is also the square root of two. In fact, Andrews’ call for descriptive, ethnographic studies of argumentation echoes Toulmin, as one of three key points in his agenda for future studies of knowledge was ‘the reintroduction of historical, empirical, and even— in a sense—anthropological considerations into the subject which philosophers had prided themselves in purifying. . . .’ (Toulmin 1958: 254).

Toulmin (1972) further elaborated on these views of sociohistoric conditions for argument and knowledge, noting on one hand the history of concepts and on the other hand the social history of the fields themselves as rational enterprises. Like Dewey and later Vygotsky, Toulmin was attentive to the role played by human artifacts (such as concepts) in consolidating history for present use, just as he was attentive to the way artifacts were activated by interactions within particular groups of people. Toulmin, again in Wittgensteinian fashion, specified apprenticeship as the model for how people come to know a field. For Toulmin then, the argument schematic was an empty shell unless infused with history and activated by knowledgeable practice. Recently, Toulmin has highlighted the centrality of Vygotsky-inspired cultural-historical activity theory to the theory of knowledge:

The central respect in which Vygotsky’s work converges on Wittgenstein’s later arguments, however, is in their shared concern with practice. For both men, language has a definite meaning only when it is related to a given constellation of practical activities. Each lexical item is meaningful within a Sprachspiel (or ‘language game’); but a language game is meaningful only if construed in the context of a given Lebensform (or ‘form of life’). (Toulmin 1999: 59)

He concludes, ‘the key notion for any new theory of knowledge needs to be practice’ (Toulmin 1999: 62).

Nevertheless, in the reception of Toulmin’s work, and even by and large in his own pedagogical e¤orts (Toulmin et al. 1984), the Toulmin model has been reified as the diagram. Although apprenticeship into communities of knowledge practice underlies all the key terms of the diagram, attention to that apprenticeship has been exceedingly rare in argument studies. Perhaps it is time to give the diagrams a bit of a rest and consider seriously the implications of seeing argumentation as sociohistoric practice, to ask how pedagogies can help attune students to the work of appropriating situated knowledge practices, to open up the ethnography of argumentation (EOA) as a branch of the larger ethnography of communication. Actually, on this last point, as the next sections merely hint, the EOA has been operating in full force for some time in situated studies of communication and activity, so perhaps it is simply time for the field of argument studies to mine the large number of existing descriptions of argumentative practices.

The next four sections are each intended to illustrate how to read ethnographic and situated studies for their relevance to argument(ation), what kinds of findings these studies have o¤ered, and what kinds of theoretical implications this research evokes. Together they suggest that rechoreographing argument studies means seeing images of the dance steps (the models) as simply one (multipurpose) tool in the much wider toolkit available to undertake a complex family of relatively marked and relatively unmarked performances.

# 3. Seeing the grounds for argument

Charles Goodwin has published a series of studies (e.g., 1994, 2000, 2003) in which he explores professional, enculturated vision as situated embodied practice. One site for this research literally explores the grounds for future arguments as he analyzes practicing archeologists mapping out layers of soil at a site. Goodwin (2000) notes that seeing the color of the soil—a key datum in developing a description of the archeological site and any subsequent arguments about it—involves a complex ensemble of practices and tools. A sample of soil must be selected and cut out with a trowel. The sample on the trowel is sprayed with water to roughly standardize one factor that a¤ects color. The sample then must be compared with color patches on the Munsell Color Chart, a loose-leaf notebook whose pages have round holes for side-by-side comparison of objects to a standardized grid of colors, each of which then has an alphanumeric code. One shade of dark yellowish brown that Goodwin’s archeologists were viewing, for example, was identified by the code $\begin{array} { r } { \mathbf { \nabla } ^ { \cdot } 1 0 \mathbf { Y } \mathbf { R } \mathbf { \nabla } \frac { 3 } { 4 } } \end{array}$ . Goodwin notes that even after the sample has been selected, removed, and prepared, the color classification remains a matter of professional competent practice and judgment, not a simple perceptual matching. There are many more color variations possible in nature than the book can include and there are adjustments to be made between the glossy color patches and the moistened dirt; among angles of vision, varied lighting conditions, and the possible physical positions of the sample and the body observing it; and so on. Thus, these practices must also be displayed, taught, and shaped by mature archeologists and learned by novices, something that understandably is done in the field. Goodwin’s studies o¤er a particularly straightforward translation of field-dependent grounds for argument.

As it happens, Latour (1999) also examines the treatment of soil, though in his case the soil was being recruited into arguments about savannah-forest transition zones in the Amazon, and the focus of his analysis was more on the circulation of reference than the classifying and mapping of the soil layers. Latour traces the conversion of the landscape into a physically marked Cartesian coordinate space, the collection of samples from across this coordinate space, and then storage of the samples in an analogous form (which turns out to be a pigeonhole box, a pedocomparator) for transportation back to French laboratories. These multiple translations produced a chain of objects and inscriptions that together constitute the data that authorized the eventual scientific argument. This chain could also become a site for critique, challenge, qualification, and rebuttal.

Amann and Knorr-Cetina (1990) studied talk, text, and practice in a genetics laboratory where researchers used $\mathbf { X }$ -ray autoradiographs to study DNA and RNA. They found that the scientists in the laboratory handled the x-ray films in certain ways in relation to light sources to begin to see what the images displayed and that seeing was collaboratively realized through talk, typically a series of skeptical questions about what was visible on those plates, proposing alternative readings or errors that might account for the images. Amann and Knorr-Cetina noted with interest that, in contrast with many studies of everyday talk where a strong preference for agreement has been found, these laboratory conversations were marked by a preference for disagreement.

Professional vision is not limited to these scientific cases. Another of Goodwin’s (1994) cases examined the ways that defense attorneys for Los Angeles police o‰cers charged with assaulting Rodney King (whose extended beating at the hands of a group of police o‰cers was captured by amateur videotape) used that videotape, sequences of cropped images from the videotape, professional classification schemes, talk, and gesture in order to apprentice jurors into a kind of professional police vision. Repeated playing of the videotape accompanied by explanations of how each movement King made ‘showed’ that he was aggressive, not cooperative, and was thus in e¤ect controlling the necessary responses and tools (use of clubs, kicks) of the police o‰cers standing around and beating him. Not incidentally, the repeated imaging and the technical discourse on police tactics may have served to cool the emotions of the event, to desensitize the jurors to the violence, to position them as allies of the police, and to convert King from human victim to prop in a technical demonstration of competent police work.

Goodwin, Latour, and Amann and Knorr-Cetina all point to arrays of situated practices that constitute knowledge in particular domains, to professional enculturated vision that involves embodied and mediated practices of seeing and marking objects, and to specific interactions between individuals located within larger histories of disciplinary and cultural interests. Whereas argument studies has focused on the challenge of identifying backing, their work points to the field-dependent and problematic character of data/evidence, the work needed to produce such grounds for argument.

# 4. Participation in argumentation: Who speaks with whom about what to what ends

A shift from argument to argumentation involves a shift from semiotic artifacts (text, talk, visual image, whatever) to semiotic activity, including the participation structures of activity, what Go¤man (1974, 1981) investigated as the management of multiple frames and footings. Lindstrom (1992), for example, examined argument among islanders on Tanna (Vanuatu), looking at how discourses (in Foucault’s sense) make it possible to explore not only the topical grounds for such arguments but also the way arguments routinely involve issues of who can participate and in what capacities (the everyday equivalent of questions about standing in courts of law). Lindstrom draws on Foucault’s theories and ethnomethodological approaches to understand the way a public dispute between a father and son unfolded as contexts, powers, and truths interacted. He notes:

Context is a field of power relations. It is not, however, a frozen field. Context rolls as people talk. Preexisting discourses and discursive conditions do set limits but they are never totally determinant. People can occasionally say the unsayable. They can contest the context, by evoking, available alternative or competing discourses. (Lindstrom 1992: 103)

Indeed, in the dispute Lindstrom analyzes about who was to blame for the death of a child, the participants not only invoked di¤erent wellestablished island discourses for illness (whether the child’s death was related to his grandfather’s cursing him or his mother and father’s early resumption of sexual relations), but also about whether the issue was a private family matter or not, which would determine who had rights to speak in, and hear, the dispute. Duranti (1994), who set out to do a linguistic study of a Samoan ergative (agency) marker and ended up doing a linguistic-rhetorical study of village fono (the village council), o¤ers detailed analyses of the ways arguments were made through language, action, and structures of participation. He analyzes cases where ‘obligatory’ syntactic markers did not appear and where apparently ‘unauthorized’ speakers were authorized to speak.

Ochs, Taylor, Rudolph, and Smith (1992) analyzed family dinner table narratives as a site where coparticipants engage in everyday theorizing and the interactional practices associated with such theorizing. The argumentative dimensions of family storytelling involved attunement to participants’ perspectives; taking up a stance in which stories were seen as versions rather than factual accounts; evaluating and challenging such accounts and the theories they endorsed; constructing and reconstructing theories of the narratives; and, of course, keeping the whole interaction going. An argument might be about the fairness of a school detention or the meaning of a business payment first identified by a family member as incorrect. In any case, they found this collaborative storytelling and theory-building involved challenges to facts, ethos, methods, even ideologies. As they reflected on what was happening in these family narratives in relation to other research they were conducting on the meetings of a physics research group (e.g., Ochs et al. 1994), they concluded that dinnertime, at least in some households, could be:

a critical environment for the socialization and acquisition of narrative competence, a competence we claim underlies scientific and other scholarly language activity. . . . The more we look at dinnertime, the more impressed we are with its potential for involving children in collaborative storytelling activity that promotes theory-building, perspective-taking, and other facets of analytic thinking. (Ochs et al. 1992: 69)

Managing the participation structures of collaborative storytelling, doing the work of contextualization, representing and challenging particular accounts, all help compose the practical space of argumentation.

Cross (1994) provides a detailed account of internal debates in an insurance company about how to represent the company’s mixed financial performance in an annual report. He traces this debate across a series of drafts and meetings. In addition to mapping out a participation structure for this work, his account of this extended, messy composing process probes the centripetal and centrifugal forces at work. In part, he found how critical position (both in the organization and in the actual material building) was to the eventual resolution of this debate in the final text of the report. In another workplace study (of a nonprofit social services agency), Beaufort (1999) traces the shifting relationship between apprenticeship and participation in authorship. Many of the authorship roles Beaufort identified were ones we might expect: editor, ghostwriter, author, researcher, document designer, and respondent. However, Beaufort also identified two key roles that are less widely recognized. These roles, inventor and negotiator, were taken up primarily by the director of the agency and a few senior sta¤. The negotiator role involved building and maintaining relationships with key individuals, creating a kind of positive climate, within which a range of requests (for grants, donations, assistance) might be positively viewed. The inventor role highlighted the possibility of creating and opening up entirely new kinds of projects for the agency, new niches to fill.

Argumentative activity, these studies suggest, is not limited to some focal text, not even to some text-in-context. Instead, it must be seen as the ongoing construction and management of contexts within which such texts are produced, distributed, and received.

# 5. From the field to multiple laminated fields

Bazerman (1999) has o¤ered a complex account of the heterogeneous symbolic engineering that Thomas Edison engaged in as part of his fundamental project, the creation of an electrified world, a project in which the incandescent light was intended to be a wedge product. Bazerman shows that the electric light involved multiple lines of argument and persuasion, each of which having its own methods and strategies. Attracting the financial backing of investors called for a di¤erent constellation of activities from motivating workers in a laboratory. Both groups might be lured by promises of future financial rewards. However, the capitalists wanted reassurance about the near-term realizability of the project (which for a period led Edison to fake demonstrations), whereas his laboratory workers appeared to be motivated by a particular kind of personal charisma enacted in the everyday work of Menlo Park. Securing patents from the U.S. government involved di¤erent kinds of work from that of securing city o‰cials’ permits for tearing up streets and laying down electrical wires. Patents demanded detailed (dated and witnessed) documentation of laboratory practices, whereas city permits involved expensive dinners and gifts of stock. Likewise, engaging the positive attention of consumers was not the same as engaging the positive attention of journalists. Consumers might want a certain kind of aesthetic design associated with middle- and upper-class taste, whereas journalists might be motivated by the kind of colorfulness that made a good story or by a bribe. Bazerman’s account o¤ers a stunningly complex view of rhetorical and practical action, one in which the work of moving from imagined invention to stabilized product tied together complex discursive networks crisscrossing multiple social fields.

In my own research on writing and disciplinary enculturation in graduate educational settings (which were often simultaneously sites of disciplinary knowledge-making), analysis of talk and texts repeatedly showed ways that formal disciplinary grounds for arguments were mixed with other, often informal and everyday grounds. For example, consider the following response given in a seminar by a professor (West) to the dissertation prospectus of a graduate student (Sean), who was arguing in part that girls’ talk was responsible for their higher levels of depressive a¤ect:

(1) West: it seems like the critical issue is what’s happening in these interchanges and if, in fact, it does generate kind of, you know, mutual gloom and /negativity/ Sean: /umhm/ West: you know, you tell me about your problems and that makes me more depressed, and I’ll tell you about mine, and you’ll get more depressed, and then I’ll say ‘I’m depressed’ and you’ll say [laughing] ‘There’s no reason to be you know.’

This exchange was only a moment in a two-hour, multiparty conversation (see Prior 1994, 1998). West did not o¤er any empirical evidence in this exchange, did not point to published research, did not explicitly name some counter theory. Instead, she o¤ered a constructed dialogue (Tannen 1989), a mininarrative received with raucous laughter that had the e¤ect of raising questions about the everyday reasonableness of the student’s hypothesis. Sean’s prospectus, on the other hand, cited several disciplinary sources, including a named psychological theory that supported his notion that depressed people may be engaging in just such a dynamic. Nevertheless, West’s comments here were decisive in leading Sean to abandon a hypothesis he had identified as the central claim of his dissertation prospectus and one that he had been defending up to that point against other questions (including earlier questions from West and another professor attending the session). This kind of argumentation was also noted by Edmondson (1984) in her analysis of the rhetoric of sociology, which she concluded was often achieved through personal argumentation, where anonymous ‘someone’ stories or even just evocative details (signs) served to motivate particular issues or claims.

As Andrews notes, Lunsford (2002) has examined the situated and dialogic nature of instruction in a course explicitly teaching Toulmin argument. Examining the links among writing assignments, course readings, lectures, peer group and instructor responses (made orally and in writing), students’ emerging series of texts, and their reflections on process and product, Lunsford complicates discussion of instruction in argumentation. For example, she notes ways that multiple terms (e.g., claim, point, thesis, topic sentence) interacted dialogically, producing complex e¤ects on students’ understanding and their writing. In particular, she found that argumentative functions (like claims) clashed with representations of textual arrangements (like thesis statements) and that multiple voices encountered throughout the composing process (from assignment through response and evaluation) were taken up with some di‰culty, especially as formal advice about arguments intersected with socially and politically charged currents of the substantive issue at hand.

Situated studies of argument(ation) then point not to Toulmin’s unified fields but to something more like Go¤man’s (1974, 1981) laminated framings, where multiple fields are more or less foregrounded or backgrounded. In recent research (Prior and Shipka 2003) on the situated composing processes of undergraduate and graduate students and professors, we have begun to see how this lamination of fields is related to the ways writers make sense out of their own multidimensional histories and to ways that a particular text might be written across multiple contexts (each context leaving a taste of its presence in the chain). Contexts for inquiry and writing also emerged as something the writers actively selected and structured as they chose specific times and places to write and read, listened to music or not, sought solitude or feedback from particular people, engaged in other activities (gardening, exercise), and so on. In short, argumentation is best understood not as an act in some unified field, but as ways of being in the many interwoven fields of the life-world.

# 6. Of black boxes and enculturated persons: Embedding/embedded arguments

Latour’s (1987) practice-oriented account (rhetoric) of how arguments get made and challenged in science looks at the accumulated historical production of di¤ering kinds of argumentative capital and ways that artifacts (from cognitive artifacts to machines) come to embed that capital in black-boxed objects, the taken-for-granteds that can be built upon without any special e¤ort. Latour and Woolgar, for example, described the mass spectrometer used by the scientists they were studying at the Salk Institute as ‘an actual piece of furniture which incorporates the majority of an earlier body of scientific activity’ (Latour and Woolgar 1979: 242). Latour and Woolgar examined the grammar of facticity as another kind of black-boxing, the way a statement moved through a cascading sequence of inscriptions on the path to becoming a fact, from highly contingent representations in the laboratory (particular measurements of a substance taken by a device at a particular time) to eventual unmarked nounness (‘endorphins are released. . . .’). If one were to want to challenge the fact of endorphins, one would then need to go backward down the path that led to the noun, to open up the black boxes and make them again contingent and local. Latour (1987) emphasizes how expensive it can be to reopen a black box, especially if an opponent wants to challenge a finding in the laboratory where specific equipment, rare materials, certain kinds of trained workers, and certain kinds of bench practices, need to be established. Summing up, he notes that his accounts of scientific and technical work:

. showed a fantastic increase in the number of elements tied to the fate of a claim—papers, laboratories, new objects, professions, interest groups, non-human allies—so many, indeed that if one wished to question a fact or to bypass an artefact one might be confronted by so many black boxes that it would become an impossible task: the claim is to be borrowed as a matter of fact, and the machine or instrument put to use without further ado. (Latour 1987: 179)

Latour’s somewhat playful accounts of strategies, alliances, and agonistic tests of strength point to the serious consequences of what has been embedded historically in objects, devices, concepts, languages, environments, and people. (To take a conceptual example, consider the a¤ordances and constraints o¤ered by the term ‘evolution’ in biological sciences today in comparison to the same term in 1870.) Critically, Latour advances these black boxes not simply as matters of contemplation, not simply as ways of understanding what makes a particular claim e¤ective (even so e¤ective that it becomes a fact), but as matters of argumentative practice.

Converting a claim into a fact, making an ambiguous physical phenomena into a named object, turning a collection of people into a community whose practices are organized around some object(ive), making a machine that works relatively unproblematically, all emerge as key moves in Latour’s accounts of argumentative strategy.

Lunsford (2003) proposes seeing argumentation as distributed argumentative activity. In addition to noting ways that changes from print to electronic media have reshaped scientific publication, Lunsford describes a case study of an educational project that involved reviewing and ranking the accessibility of materials for multicultural and di¤erently abled students. The first step in classifying such materials was to determine criteria for the review, a question that was a matter of clear debate among the professors and graduate student research assistants working on this project. Ultimately, however, this argumentative activity became embedded as standards in the textual guidelines for review as well as in a network of trained and motivated reviewers. Lunsford makes the point that the argument then was distributed in semiotic artifacts (the texts used for reviews and for training reviewers) as well as in the network of people, the trained reviewers. In short, argumentation may involve making people as well as making claims.

Go¤man (1981) set his account of frames and footing against the assumed prototype of the dyadic verbal interaction. His critique of language study in general also applies to studies of argument as Latour’s and Lunsford’s accounts suggest. In contrast to the prototype of face-toface dyadic talk, they begin to conceive of multiparty interactions, dispersed across times and places, mediated by a variety of contestable and black-boxed artifacts. As Lunsford (2003) notes, distributed argumentative activity often takes the form of extended campaigns of socialization. Consider how Disney deploys movies, clothing, stu¤ed animals, books, fantasy theme parks, specialized TV channels, computer games, and so on. Disney is not simply selling individual products; it is working to build worlds and produce people preoriented to, and predisposed to accepting, a range of Disney products (and values), whether the latest installment of the 101 Dalmatians or the next Britney Spears. Political campaigns are likewise distributed, extended, multiperson, multimedia phenomena, not simply the crafting of isolated persuasive texts. Whether it is Disney, a particular political party, or evolutionary biology, campaigns highlight Burke’s (1950) argument that rhetoric, persuasion, is foremost about identification. A sociohistoric practice perspective emphasizes that identification is not just an e¤ect of argument, but of the social work of cogenesis (Prior 1998), of forging aligned identities, relations, artifacts, institutions, and practices.

# 7. Pedagogical reflections and conclusions

As the previous sections begin to suggest, though rarely under the banner of argument studies, there is already a considerable body of ethnographic work in quite diverse settings that can be mined to better understand the sociocultural dimensions of argument. I certainly agree that more work in this line of inquiry should be pursued and, as Andrews has proposed, that studies like Lunsford’s (2002) of explicit and implicit instruction in argument will be very profitable. However, what we should expect from such ethnographic studies is not a series of refined models for argument. Models can certainly function as tools for reflection and action. However, what ethnographic studies of argument(ation) are already pointing to is the need to develop and rehearse practices, both general and particular, for thinking, seeing, acting, valuing, collaborating, talking, and writing. Are such practices simply too complex or too specialized to be pedagogically useful? I don’t think so. If reflection on texts can assist people in structuring texts, then reflection on argumentation as situated activity should help students to understand the options available, help them generate new goals and see new means. What if students were asked to consider not only how to unpack the argumentative moves a text makes, but also the kind of argumentative practices that Latour (1987) describes? What if they were invited to compose multimedia campaigns as well as persuasive arguments? What if they attended ethnographically to the arguments made at their own dinner tables or on their own playgrounds (see, e.g., M. Goodwin 1990) as well as those made in the mass media? If argument calls for a study of metagenres, argumentation calls for a study of social practices and socialization. From such a curriculum, students might develop not only a critical awareness of how they are being persuasively socialized, but also a recognition of the possibility of, and possible means for, (re)building their social contexts. The goal of this educational activity might be conceptualized as one of helping students develop lucid practice (analogous to lucid dreaming1), in which they are both awake to what is happening in their social worlds and prepared to alter the conditions, trajectories, and goals of their future activity.

# Note

1. LaBerge (1985) describes lucid dreaming as when you become aware you are dreaming during the dream and, thus, are able to direct the course of the dream or at least modify your reaction to dream events.

# References

Amann, K. and Knorr-Cetina, K. (1990). The fixation of (visual) evidence. In Representation in Scientific Practice, M. Lynch and S. Woolgar (eds.), 85–121. Cambridge: MIT Press.   
Andrews, R. (1995). Teaching and Learning Argument. London: Cassell.   
Bazerman, C. (1999). The Languages of Edison’s Light. Cambridge: MIT Press.   
Beaufort, A. (1999). Writing in the Real World: Making the Transition from School to Work. New York: Teachers College Press.   
Becker, H. (1982). Art Worlds. Berkeley: University of California Press.   
Burke, K. (1950). A Rhetoric of Motives. Berkeley: University of California Press.   
Cross, G. (1994). Collaboration and Conflict: A Contextual Exploration of Group Writing and Positive Emphasis. Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.   
Duranti, A. (1994). From Grammar to Politics: Linguistic Anthropology in a Western Samoan Village. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Edmondson, R. (1984). The Rhetoric of Sociology. London: MacMillian.   
Go¤man, E. (1974). Frame Analysis: An Essay on the Organization of Experience. Boston: Northeastern University Press.   
— (1981). Forms of Talk. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.   
Goodwin, C. (1994). Professional vision. American Anthropologist 96 (3): 606–633. (2000). Practices of color classification. Mind Culture and Activity 7 (1–2): 19–36. (2003). Pointing as situated practice. In Pointing: Where Language, Culture, and Cognition Meet, Sotaro Kita (ed.), 217–241. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Goodwin, M. (1990). He-Said-She-Said: Talk as Social Organization among Black Children. Bloomington: Indiana University Press.   
Kaufer, D. and Geisler, C. (1991). A scheme for representing academic argument. The Journal of Advanced Composition 11 (1): 107–122.   
LaBerge, S. (1985). Lucid Dreaming. Los Angeles: J. P. Tarcher.   
Latour, B. (1987). Science in Action: How to Follow Scientists and Engineers through Society. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. (1999). Pandora’s Hope: Essays on the Reality of Science Studies. Cambridge: Harvard University Press.   
Latour, B. and Woolgar, S. (1979). Laboratory Life: The Social Construction of Scientific Facts. Princeton: Princeton University Press.   
Lindstrom, L. (1992). Context contests: Debatable truth statements on Tanna (Vanuatu). In Rethinking Context: Language as an Interactive Phenomenon, A. Duranti and C. Goodwin (eds.), 101–124. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lunsford, K. (2002). Contextualizing Toulmin’s model in the writing classroom: A case study. Written Communication 19 (1): 109–174. (2003). Distributed argumentative activity: Redefining arguments and their re-mediation from a sociohistoric perspective. Unpublished Ph.D. Dissertation, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.   
Mitchell, S. and Riddle, M. (2000). Improving the Quality of Argument in Higher Education: Final Report. Middlesex University, School of Lifelong Learning and Education.   
Prior, P. (1994). Response, revision, disciplinarity: A microhistory of a dissertation prospectus in sociology. Written Communication 11 (4): 483–533. (1998). Writing/Disciplinarity: A Sociohistoric Account of Literate Activity in the Academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Prior, P. and Shipka, J. (2003). Chronotopic lamination: Tracing the contours of literate activity. In Writing Selves, Writing Societies: Research from Activity Perspectives, C. Bazerman and D. Russell (eds.), 180–238. Fort Collins, CO: The WAC Clearinghouse and Mind, Culture, and Activity. 3http://wac.colostate.edu/books/selves_societies/4   
Ochs, E., Jacoby, S., and Gonzales, P. (1994). Interpretive journeys: How scientists talk and travel through graphic spaces. Configurations 2 (1): 151–171.   
Ochs, E., Taylor, C., Rudolph, D., and Smith, R. (1992). Storytelling as a theory-building activity. Discourse Processes 15 (1): 39–72.   
Shipka, J. (2004). ‘. . . because doing this allows me to do what doing that would not:’ Composition as material, personal, and intellectual negotiation. Paper presented at the Conference on College Composition and Communication. San Antonio, Texas.   
Spiro, R., Feltovich, P., Coulson, R., and Anderson, D. (1989). Multiple analogies for complex concepts: Antidotes for analogy-induced misconception in advanced knowledge acquisition. In Similarity and analogical reasoning, S. Vosniadou and A. Ortony (eds.), 498–531. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Tannen, D. (1989). Talking Voices: Repetition, Dialogue, and Imagery in Conversational Discourse. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Toulmin, S. (1958). The Uses of Argument. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
— (1972). Human Understanding. Princeton: Princeton University Press.   
— (1999). Knowledge as shared procedures. In Perspectives on Activity Theory, Y. Engestrom, R. Miettinen, and R. Punamaki (eds.), 53–64. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Toulmin, S., Rieke, R., and Janik, A. (1984). An Introduction to Reasoning, 2nd ed. New York: Macmillan.   
Vygotksy, L. (1987). Thinking and Speech (N. Minick, ed. and trans.). New York: Plenum.

Paul Prior is an Associate Professor in English and Associate Director of the Center for Writing Studies at the University of Illinois (Urbana-Champaign). His studies of writing, talk, disciplinarity, and social practice have been published in articles, book chapters, and two books, Writing/Disciplinarity: A Sociohistoric Account of Literate Activity in the Academy and What Writing Does and How It Does It: An Introduction to Analyzing Texts and Textual Practices (co-edited with Charles Bazerman). Address for correspondence: 275 English Building, University of Illinois, 608 S. Wright St., Urbana, IL 61801, USA 3pprior@uiuc.edu4.