# Writing the qualitative dissertation: what motivates and sustains commitment to a fuzzy genre?

Diane Belchera,\*, Alan Hirvelab

a Department of Applied Linguistics/ESL, Georgia State University, P.O. Box 4099, Atlanta, GA 30302-4099, USA b School of Teaching and Learning, Ohio State University, 1945 N. High Street, Columbus, OH 43210, USA

# Abstract

Several L2 literacy specialists, for example, Flowerdew [Flowerdew, J. (1999). Problems in writing for scholarly publication in English: The case of Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8, 243–264], has pointed out that L2 writers may consciously avoid adopting qualitative research methods, undoubtedly because of the challenges that such a self-reflexive, rhetorically complex, and generically unstable research report mode poses. Those who advise L2 graduate students may wonder if these students should be discouraged from using qualitative methods. The goal of this qualitative study was to determine what initially motivates L2 doctoral dissertation writers to adopt a qualitative approach and what sustains their commitment to it. Both intrinsic and extrinsic motivation orientations were found in the self reports of these successful L2 qualitative dissertation writers, as were strong philosophical commitment to their research paradigm and intense intellectual curiosity about their topics. Some students, however, were more research paradigmdriven, while others were more topic-driven, but none perceived their status as L2 users as an insurmountable obstacle to success as qualitative dissertation writers.

$©$ 2005 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Dissertation writing; Motivation; Qualitative research; Second language writing; English for Academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

Writing the dissertation was an experience in itself; adding qualitative research on top of that made for an especially interesting time of learning, reflection, and practice. I often felt like I was playing a game of pickup sticks while balancing on a high wire over an empty river in the middle of a moonless night. (Meloy, 1994, p. 2)

Meloy’s statement above colorfully captures what for many qualitative researchers is the emotional essence of their writing experience: a feeling of great uncertainty and risk-taking. Her own and her informants’ qualitative research writing experiences have convinced her that “one characteristic of qualitative researchers is that they usually enjoy writing and generally must be able to write well.” (Meloy, 1994, p. 10). Meloy herself and all of her informants in her helpful handbook, we should point out, are mother-tongue speakers of English (for a review of Meloy, see Belcher, 1999). If L2 qualitative doctoral dissertation writers were to figuratively describe their own experience, would they see themselves as good writers who enjoy writing? Would they perhaps feel as though they were balancing in mid-air without even a wire? Many L2 dissertation writers have described themselves to us in essentially those terms. In fact, our own experiences with these writers over the course of several years as members of their dissertation committees are what have led us to look more deeply into this topic: the challenges faced by L2 writers of qualitative dissertations. Having seen student peers and faculty repeatedly discourage L2 graduate students from taking the qualitative route, we wondered what motivates students’ choice of this path and what sustains their journey to the end of it, to the completed dissertation.

# 2. Defining the paradigm

Before focusing on our study itself, a definition of the qualitative research paradigm may be helpful, as well as a brief discussion of why this methodology can pose some unique challenges to any writer—why writing specialists such as Meloy contend that “.a novice [qualitative] researcher.by necessity of the processes must be or will become a more able writer.” (Meloy, 1994, p. 10). Rossman and Rallis (2003) have distilled for us what many researchers would agree (e.g., see Denzin & Lincoln, 2000) are the defining characteristics of qualitative research methodology, its preferred data types, and the qualitative researcher her/himself. According to Rossman and Rallis, qualitative research is (1) naturalistic, not experimental, (2) triangulated, using a variety of methods, (3) context-sensitive, (4) emergent, rather than hypothesis confirming/disconfirming, and (6) essentially interpretive. The data that qualitative researchers seek and value, again according to Rossman and Rallis, consist of images, sounds, words, and sometimes even numbers, but are predominantly verbal. The qualitative researcher her/himself can be seen as distinct from other researchers in that s/he exhibits (1) holistic views of the social world, (2) self-reflexivity, (3) sensitivity to personal individuality, and (4) complex reasoning (Rossman & Rallis, 2003).1

As is probably obvious by now, this is a research process with particularly heavy demands on writers, and language users in general: as fieldnote takers, interviewers and transcribers of interviews, self-reflexive participant observers, data analysts processing their own observations and reflections on that processing, and data presenters (often employing narrative). Rossman and Rallis’ (2003) delineation of ‘best practices’ for qualitative researchers even further highlights the qualities that the qualitative researcher/ writer/data processor is expected to display commitment to, for example, comfort with ambiguity and highly developed interpersonal, emotional, ethical, and political sensitivity. Such practices, one might argue, are not easily learned or taught but are more likely acquired over time with the help of expert mentoring, or legitimate peripheral participation in communities of practice, as Lave and Wenger (1991) and Wenger, McDermott, and Snyder (2002) would say (see also Belcher, 1994).

Further complicating the qualitative research writing task is the qualitative research report genre itself. It is perhaps an understatement to say that this genre is not well defined in several senses of the term ‘defined,’ that is, not just because of its relative newness and the limited research on it as a genre, but also because of its distinctive ‘fuzziness.’2 Richardson’s (2000) list of criteria for evaluating the writing up of qualitative research gives us a strong indication of why this research report genre is likely to remain ill defined:

† Substantive contribution. Does the writer demonstrate deeply grounded.social scientific perspective? How has this perspective informed the construction of the text? Aesthetic merits. Does the use of creative analytic practices open up the text, invite interpretative response? Is the text artistically shaped, satisfying, complex, and not boring? Reflexivity. How has the author’s subjectivity been both a producer and a product of this text? Is there adequate self-awareness and self-exposure for the reader to make judgments about the point of view? Impact. Does this affect me? Emotionally? Intellectually? Expression of a reality. Does this text embody a fleshed out, embodied sense of lived experience (p. 937)

Richardson’s criteria may well bring to mind characteristics of process, expressive, and even creative writing: that is, allowing authorial perspective or purpose to determine text construction, as process advocates have long advised; not suppressing one’s subjectivity, a distinguishing feature of expressive writing; and creating a sense of lived experience, inviting reader interpretation and emotional, not only intellectual, engagement, as literary texts, especially well written novels, frequently do (on the overlap between narratology and theories of qualitative data representation, see Eisner, 1997). Richardson’s rubric (cf. Wolcott, 1990) suggests that would-be qualitative research writers might actually be better served by creative writing workshops than by any typical EAP instruction.3

# 3. Research on advanced L2 academic writing

Although there is a growing amount of research on L2 graduate student writing (e.g., Silva, Reichelt, & Lax-Farr, 1994) and of L2 dissertation writing in particular (Allison, Cooley, Lewkowicz, & Nunan, 1998; Belcher, 1994; Casanave, 2002; Dong, 1998; Hirvela & Belcher, 2001; Paltridge, 2002; Prior, 1998; Starfield, 2003; Swales, 1990; Swales & Lindemann, 2001; Swales & Luebs, 2002), there has been little focus, understandably we might add, on qualitative dissertation writing so far. A few researchers, though, have pointed out the challenges of qualitative research writing faced by L2 writers and their resulting attitudes toward it. Chang and Swales (1999) found L2 graduate students uncomfortable with the mix of formal and informal registers now valued in the research writing of some disciplines. Starfield (personal communication, April, 2004) has observed that L2 graduate students in the arts and social sciences may feel challenged by the playfulness of language often exhibited in qualitative publications. Flowerdew (1999), in his work with L2 professional academics in Hong Kong, noted that they deliberately steered clear of qualitative research because they perceived it as putting them, as L2 writers, at a disadvantage.

# 4. Research goals

Our own experience as participant-observers of L2 dissertation writing is that, despite the demands of the qualitative route, it is becoming increasingly popular, including among L2 speakers in the graduate programs that served as the research sites of this study. Our observation of this phenomenon, the increasing popularity of this apparently quite challenging paradigm for writers, whether L1 or L2, was a major impetus for the present study.

The questions that we posed for ourselves in our study were the following:

1. How do L2 doctoral students view the language use and writing demands placed on qualitative researchers?   
2. What is the primary motivation in L2 doctoral students’ choice of the qualitative paradigm for their dissertation?   
3. What sustains L2 doctoral students’ commitment to the qualitative paradigm throughout the dissertation process?

# 5. Methodology

In an effort to address our research questions, we chose six informants whose graduatelevel academic writing we were already quite familiar with, having followed their progress through the doctoral program as their instructors (in some cases having had some students in as many as three of our doctoral seminars) and as readers on their doctoral candidacy examination and dissertation committees (in one case, as dissertation co-advisor). In other words, we had already read, responded to, and evaluated seminar papers, examination essays, and multiple drafts of these students’ dissertations, and were privy to other faculty members’ reactions to their work. For all of the students, we had had one to three years of participant-observation experience as their instructors, exam and dissertation readers, and as shoulders to cry on or supporters to rejoice with. All the participants, whose ages ranged from mid-twenties to late thirties, were L2 writers in the field of education and had chosen to use the qualitative paradigm. What follows below is a brief profile of each participant. All are referred to by pseudonymous family names.

# 5.1. Liang

A Taiwanese female who conducted a qualitative study of immigrant learners. Despite focusing much more heavily on quantitative research courses during her doctoral study, she ‘started to resist statistics’ and felt called to conduct qualitative research after completing a three-course sequence on qualitative methodology.

# 5.2. Chantsavang

A Thai female who conducted a qualitative, classroom-based study in her home country. Her doctoral research course trajectory echoed Liang’s: a much heavier load of quantitative research courses, during which she came to feel ‘miserable,’ and a gradual shift to a qualitative research orientation via participation in a qualitative course sequence.

# 5.3. Jin

A Taiwanese female who conducted a qualitative study of L1 and L2 writers. Though she had written a quantitative MA thesis, her experiences in qualitative research courses led her to decide early in her doctoral studies to pursue a qualitative dissertation.

# 5.4. Tanaka

A Japanese female who conducted a combined quantitative/qualitative study. Focused much more extensively on quantitative than qualitative courses during doctoral study, she was considered outstanding by quantitative methodology professors. More drawn initially to conducting a quantitative study, she realized, as her topic developed, that its sociopolitical nature required a qualitative perspective.

# 5.5. Zhang

A Mainland Chinese male who conducted a qualitative/ethnographic study of young learners. Strongly oriented toward quantitative research during doctoral study with considerable success in quantitative course work and several quantitative projects, he opted to pursue a qualitative dissertation after realizing that the qualitative paradigm was the only realistic option for his topic and research questions.

# 5.6. Han

A Mainland Chinese female who conducted a qualitative study of L2 writers. Like Tanaka and Zhang, Han, as a doctoral student, was primarily interested in and highly successful during quantitative courses (described as a ‘prototype for other students’ by one professor). She initially hoped to conduct a quantitative study and attempted to design one for her topic but discovered this was not feasible.

What is especially striking about all six of these qualitative dissertation writers, in addition to their all being East Asian (not uncommon in their graduate program), is that all had backgrounds in quantitative research methods, in most cases, in fact, quite extensive backgrounds: as many as six ten-week courses. While all may not have equally enjoyed their quantitative methods courses, most did extremely well in them, with ‘A’ being the most frequent course grade. Clearly, fear of mathematics was not a factor in their choice of qualitative methods for their dissertations.

To determine the participants’ perceptions of what motivated their choice and sustained their commitment to qualitative methods after having just completed writing the dissertation or when very near the end, i.e., composing the results and discussion chapters, we interviewed each of the informants for approximately one hour using a semi-structured interview format (see Appendix for the scripted interview questions). Our interview protocol was, to a great extent, inspired by our familiarity with the participants’ dissertation experiences. Unscripted follow-up questions often arose as a result of the particular contexts that we, as participant-observers, were able to place initial responses to our questions in. After the interviews were transcribed, both authors repeatedly and independently read the transcriptions, paying particular attention to patterns emerging with respect to the comments on motivation and sustained commitment elicited by the interview foci. When our shortlists of recurring topics in the interview data were compared, they were virtually identical. It was then decided that recent research and theory on learner motivation and learner self-efficacy could helpfully inform the sorting through and, in general, appreciation of the range and abundance of informant commentary on motivation orientations and strategies that the interviews elicited. Before presenting and discussing the interview data, we will give a brief overview of the motivation and self-efficacy theories that we found to provide an especially meaningful lens for interpreting the interview data.

# 6. Theoretical grounding

Recent work on language learner motivation has moved beyond the simple integrative and instrumental dichotomy of early language learning motivation theory toward more subtle and nuanced appreciations of intrinsic and extrinsic motivation orientations (Noels, 2001). Defining intrinsic orientations as “derived from one’s inherent pleasure and interest in the activity.[and] undertaken because of the spontaneous satisfaction that is associated with it,” (p. 45) Noels (2001) offers the following intrinsic motivation taxonomy:

1. Intrinsic-knowledge. Feelings of pleasure that come from developing knowledge and satisfying one’s curiosity about a topic area.   
2. Intrinsic-accomplishment. Enjoyable sensations.associated with surpassing oneself and mastering a difficult task. The emphasis is on the process of achievement and not the end result.   
3. Intrinsic-stimulation. Simple enjoyment in the aesthetics of the experience.characterized by a sense of ‘flow’ (Csikszentmihalyi, 1975). (Noels, 2001, p. 45)

For Noels, extrinsic orientations, on the other hand, are distinguished by “.reasons [for learning].[that] are instrumental to some consequence [which could include integration into a community] apart from inherent interest in the activity” (p. 46). In other words, pleasure in the activity is not the primary motivation in this case. Noels classifies extrinsic orientations on a cline of least to most internalized (bracketed additions are our own):

1. External regulation. “.learning.because of some contingency in the environment” [e.g., a degree requirement].   
2. Introjected regulation. Contingencies are adopted and pressures and rewards are selfimposed to protect sense of self-worth [e.g., being motivated by fear of failure].   
3. Identified regulation. Value of activity is recognized as an important goal for the self [e.g. becoming a successful professional].   
4. Integrated regulation. “.identified regulations are fully assimilated to the self.and brought into congruence with one’s other values and needs” [e.g., seeing oneself as a versatile researcher who can adapt to any research situation or topic] (p. 48).

As we will soon show, all of the above orientations, with the exception of external regulation, are conspicuous among our informants’ self-reflections. No participant felt forced to choose the qualitative paradigm (i.e., external regulation), though they may have felt constrained by their topic choice. In fact, as suggested earlier, in spite of peer and sometimes status-superior pressure to choose otherwise, all voluntarily, if not always gladly, opted for qualitative projects.

The sustaining motivation of our participants is, we feel, made easier to comprehend and appreciate with the help of Bandura’s (1994) theory of self-efficacy, defined “as people’s beliefs about their capabilities to produce designated levels of performance that exercise influence over events that affect their lives” (p. 71). According to Bandura, “the stronger the sense of self-efficacy, the bolder people are in taking on taxing and threatening activities” (p. 75). We can identify people with strong self-efficacy beliefs if they

1. Have high assurance in their capabilities   
2. Approach difficult tasks as challenges to be mastered rather than as threats to be avoided   
3. Develop intrinsic interest and deep engrossment in activities   
4. Set themselves challenging goals and maintain strong commitment to them   
5. Heighten and sustain their efforts in the face of failure   
6. Quickly recover their sense of efficacy after failures or setbacks   
7. Attribute failure to insufficient effort or deficient knowledge and skills which are acquirable   
8. Approach threatening situations with assurance that they can exercise control over   
them (Bandura, 1994, p. 71).

We found evidence of all of the above characteristics in our informants’ sustained commitment to their project, with the possible exception of the first: ‘high assurance in their capabilities,’ the one characteristic that we might intuitively expect to be most essential to self-efficacy. We will return to this issue of apparent lack of confidence in abilities after our discussion of the informants’ motivation orientations.

# 7. Results

In the following sections, we report on and discuss our findings with respect to both motivation orientations and strategies for sustaining commitment to the qualitative dissertation process.

# 7.1. Motivation orientations

Interestingly, and not by any intelligent design on our own part, half $( n = 3 )$ of our informants clearly fell into the intrinsic orientation category with regard to their initial motivation, and the other half $( n = 3 )$ ) just as clearly appeared extrinsically oriented in their initial motivation. We might also identify the former group as more philosophically committed to the qualitative paradigm, while the latter extrinsically oriented dissertation writers were, by their own admission, more pragmatic in their motivation.

# 7.1.1. Intrinsic motivation

In the intrinsically oriented group, all three types of intrinsic motivation as defined by Noels (2001) (see Section 6 above) are conspicuous in the self reports of these three students: Liang, Chantsavang, and Jin. The intrinsic-knowledge orientation, or pleasure in satisfying intellectual curiosity and expanding one’s knowledge, was immediately salient in their reflections. For Liang, attending her first qualitative methods classes was an unexpected source of pleasure: ‘I went to qualitative classes.I think all the time.I feel so good.. I feel so happy. I think I got a lot of answers I don’t know before..’ In Liang’s eyes, qualitative methodology, with its required attentiveness to people in all their individual variation, was a perfect match for her sense of who she was:

.another thing is I think my personality.I want to talk to people.I want to be close to people, to my participants; it’s very interesting. I want to hear their.true voices.. I can explore something from them.for me.qualitative is more multiple truths, multiple identities, and multiple facts, and quantitative.[is] quantified things [researchers’emphasis]

For Chantsavang as well, there was pleasure in what she saw as the personal meaningfulness of qualitative knowledge construction:

In my dissertation, I focus on perceptions of participants.their behaviors or patterns and the naturalistic settings, and my presence there means something, and.when having everything combined together, I think the findings sound very substantial and convincing and meaningful to me. When compared to all those formulas [for quantitative research].that’s really very abstract, and I don’t think it’s really insightful for me.’

For Jin, on the other hand, pleasure was derived more from her awareness of her own intellectual growth, her sense of changing epistemology after discovering qualitative methodology: ‘.that really deconstructed and also helped me to conceptualize what counts as knowledge.really changed quite dramatically about how I think, how I look at learning.and the political tension of that; that really has quite an impact..’ All three students, thus, took pleasure in the particular types of learning about themselves and the world that qualitative methodology afforded them.

Closely related to, yet distinct from, intrinsic-knowledge motivation is the intrinsicaccomplishment orientation, or pleasure in the process of meeting a challenge and surpassing oneself. Liang, Chantsavang, and Jin took much delight in their accomplishments as qualitative researchers despite their struggle as writers, or perhaps even because of the struggle. For Liang, in particular, the rewards of the writing-asdiscovery process inherent in qualitative research were perceived as well worth the birth pangs suffered:

Sometimes for one night, I just write one paragraph. Yea, one night, one paragraph; whole day, one paragraph. It happened very often.but interesting part is.data is like.water. I’m the researcher; I can shape what I want.. It’s [the data analysis] tough, but interesting.. At one week, I come back to see this part of data.I have a different way [of seeing it]. I want to analyze a different way.. It’s very interesting, very challenging.

For Chantsavang, writing up qualitative research was a challenge she relished meeting:

Even though writing is really very difficult when you express in L2, but if you don’t give it a try, then you would not know what is out there, how much you can go. .I believe in pushing boundaries. I really want to explore.how far I could go.. So I think, you know, that [writing] may be one difficulty, but it shouldn’t hinder one from doing something that they have passion for.

Jin, again, was most pleased by the growth she saw in herself when meeting the challenge of the qualitative reading/writing/discovery process:

.it’s quite, um, laminating, and you just need to see them [the data] through, you know, um, vertically, horizontally.it really requires a lot of time and energy to look at the patterns.. But at the same time, this is really good learning experiences for me, to think about my theory.[and] go back and check, and that’s really helpful for me to enhance my understanding theoretically.that’s a very helpful inquiry process.

Thus, while all three of the intrinsically oriented students found the qualitative dissertation process far from easy, they not only enjoyed but felt enlightened by it.

The third and final type of intrinsic orientation, intrinsic-stimulation, or “enjoyment in the aesthetics of the experience” (Noels, 2001, p. 45), is different from the other two in having less to do with pleasure in growth or meeting challenges, and more to do with the appeal of something rather more elusive. Liang, Chantsavang, and Jin used terms such as ‘love,’ ‘beauty,’ and ‘charm’ to describe the appeal of qualitative approaches. For Liang, it is the ‘authentic language communication,’ i.e., interacting with her informants, that she ‘loves.’ Jin describes the qualitative research experience: ‘I mean, its beauty I really appreciate.’ And for Chantsavang, the shifting ‘boundaries, like from.less positivist and then.interpretive and then critical theory, and deconstructing.is the charm of qualitative framework.’ It is not difficult to fathom why, for all three of these students, the choice of research paradigm would play a dominant role in much of their initial dissertation project decision-making.

# 7.1.2. Extrinsic motivation

For the other three participants in our study, Tanaka, Zhang, and Han, the orientation picture is more complex, less uniform, and less stable than that of the intrinsically motivated. For the extrinsically oriented, the qualitative paradigm was not one that they adopted with great enthusiasm. Tanaka, for instance, clearly exemplified ‘introjected regulation,’ in the pressures she imposed on herself and delaying tactics employed to combat her fear of failure in conducting and writing up her research—strategies that she does not recommend to others:

I’ve been working on my dissertation more than, for more than two years now, right? It’s longer than my coursework.. And I think it’s more like a fear factor, my maybe inconfidence in myself. Whether I could do that. And just writing proposal took longer; carrying out my plan took me longer, and I was afraid that I might not be able to do what I promised in proposal. So maybe by doing extra literature review or something I can postpone.real data collection, so I wish other people wouldn’t do the same things.

Yet all three extrinsically motivated students also showed signs of the more selfdetermined extrinsic motivation that Noels calls ‘identified regulation,’ or valuing an activity as ‘an important goal for the self.’ All three were committed to topics that they were determined to research in the most effective ways possible, even if it meant using a paradigm they were not especially comfortable with. Tanaka, determined to do a dissertation on world Englishes, because ‘there are people with power and there are people with no power, and maybe unconsciously people are manipulated,’ felt that the qualitative paradigm, with its built-in political sensitivity, would be ‘more appropriate.’ She was uncomfortable, though, with the lack of generalizability—‘I’m not really convinced.- what about the general tendency?’—and felt her personality was not right for the type of close personal interaction that qualitative methods required:

If I were someone who is very kind of warm person like.and who is comfortable with feelings or empathy.. I have friendship.empathy and sympathy, but I’m really not comfortable sharing them or showing it.. But you just can’t say that I’m very cool.I go with quantitative. I don’t think it fits that straight way.

The pragmatic solution Tanaka reached was to adopt both the qualitative and quantitative paradigms for her project. Zhang began his project assuming that a mixed quantitative/qualitative design, such as Tanaka’s, would be most effective for his topic, self-efficacy in young Chinese learners of English. However, when faced with some insurmountable methodological problems, not being able to find 200 Chinese students all at the same grade level in the American city he was living in, Zhang, like Tanaka, took the pragmatic route, not just for efficiency’s sake but for the sake of his topic: ‘to find the best paradigm to answer my research questions.’ Also like Tanaka, Zhang chose this paradigm despite awareness of his own discomfort with it and misgivings about its conclusiveness, or persuasiveness:

Actually, frankly speaking, I really do not like qualitative study very much because it’s so, you know, it’s painstaking; yes, I think that’s a good word.. Ah, since I have done my own study, I know how time-consuming a qualitative study is.and also.I don’t feel that I can persuade my committee members that this is the finding I have found.they always ask you to look at your data a couple of times.to get some conclusions and go very deep. So, I don’t know how deep that is. How deep is deep?

Yet, Zhang also recognized the value of a qualitative approach to his topic, and was eventually convinced that he had made the right choice for his project, a realization he describes arriving at as a result of the qualitative research process experience: ‘.for children’s self-efficacy, you have to understand their context very well in order to ask their beliefs.. So, that’s why I, I still believe.you have to do a qualitative [study].’ Han as well was confronted with the same sample size dilemma as Zhang was, and felt forced to adopt a qualitative approach despite its lack of appeal: ‘I was still kind of unwilling because I was told that a qualitative study was really hard and would take a lot of time.but then I had no choice, and I thought I had to do a qualitative study.’ Thus for all three students, a commitment to the best possible research approach to their topic, and hence to a successful dissertation, was the overriding motivation. The qualitative paradigm itself held no special initial attraction, and, in fact, was off-putting for them.

Most interesting about the initially extrinsically motivated was the change (as suggested above with Zhang) that they saw themselves undergoing during their work with the qualitative paradigm. They described themselves as, in effect, arriving at ‘integrated regulation,’ the most internalized and self-determined type of extrinsic motivation, again according to Noels (2001). They “fully assimilated to the self” the “identified regulations” (initially pragmatic constraints) which were “brought into congruence” with their values and needs (p. 48). Zhang describes the transformation he underwent: ‘At first I was disappointed, but now I’m not.. I think for these [research] questions, a qualitative design, um, suits my questions very well.’ For Zhang, the transformation in his attitude, not just towards the methodology but towards his informants and himself as well, actually occurred, as noted above, while in the midst of using qualitative research methods in the field. The experience of doing this type of research was akin to a conversion experience, one that revealed the ‘beauty’ of qualitative research to him, hence making his initially extrinsic orientation look not far removed from intrinsic:

But when I was actually interviewing the children, the children became active participants.. So, that’s the beauty of qualitative study.you get feedback from the participants. They also change you.. So they actually, they’re very young.eight or nine years old, but.their thinking is not that simple as I thought.. So they helped me to rethink my interview questions.

Ultimately, however, Zhang remained aligned with the quantitative paradigm, stating that even after his successful qualitative experience: ‘I [still] really prefer a quantitative study.’ He was completely convinced, though, again as mentioned earlier, that for his topic, qualitative worked best—better than he had ever anticipated, and better than a quantitative approach might have even if the sample size had been attainable. Han too described a transformation in her thinking about both qualitative methods and herself, although for her, it was the entire experience of the sometimes painful qualitative dissertation process that led her to a more positive view of the paradigm and a realization of its ‘beauty’:

.I didn’t have confidence in my interview skills.. I think I was also concerned about writing up the data. I thought it was way too complicated and.I heard you could be overwhelmed with data. You could be lost in the data, and that did happen to me.. But now that I have really done this study, I really see the beauty of qualitative study.. I’m really very happy.. I would probably have done it faster, finished it earlier [if it were quantitative], but I wouldn’t have learned as much. And I really think that this topic.ESL students, their actions, their experiences [with portfolios].. This [paradigm] is the right choice. And I don’t regret it at all.

Although these students may not have actually reached the level of pleasure in the paradigm itself that was evident in the three earlier described intrinsically motivated students, they certainly eventually came to appreciate it to a degree that they themselves had not initially thought possible.

# 7.2. Sustaining commitment

As is also probably obvious by now, all six students exhibited in their self reports numerous self-efficacy characteristics, such as, associating success with effort or knowledge and skills that are attainable (see Section 6 for a fuller list), qualities and practices that enabled them to sustain commitment to their projects despite considerable disincentives. Self-efficacy, as mentioned earlier, can be defined as belief in one’s ability to perform at a high enough level to exert control over life events (Bandura, 1994), e.g., believing that one has what it takes to complete a dissertation. Bandura (1994) suggests that there are four main sources of self-efficacy beliefs—mastery experiences, social modeling, social persuasion, and stress management—all of which we can see examples of in the accounts of our participants.

A “resilient sense of efficacy,” Bandura (1994) argues, comes not from easy successes but from experience in surmounting obstacles with sustained effort (p. 72). From the mastery experience perspective, many L2 writers can be perceived as entering the dissertation phase of graduate study with a fund of experiences likely to have already strengthened their belief in themselves. Needing to work hard to succeed comes as no surprise to them—a sentiment we heard articulated repeatedly by our participants. All in our study expressed opinions similar to Han’s above (in Section 7.1.2) about the heavy workload they faced, especially as L2 users, on the qualitative route they had chosen. Chantsavang, for example, remarked, ‘I envy quantitative people because there’s a kind of format. Okay, if the finding is this, you just follow this pattern and then, off you go.’ Zhang similarly observed, ‘For quantitative, the language is much simpler.. As nonnative English speakers, we can just follow other people’s language patterns.. There is a fixed trail for you to follow. For example, if it’s a $t$ -test, you report the $t$ value, the $p$ value, confidence interval.. For qualitative.it’s more diverse.’ Zhang also felt, as did other participants, that doing qualitative research meant writing a longer dissertation: ‘A lot longer because I have a lot of data.and because I don’t know what to write, I will write a lot.since I don’t want to miss something important.’ Tanaka noted too that she when she decided to combine a qualitative approach with quantitative research, she knew she was not choosing efficiency: ‘In Dr X’s class we did.dialogue or conversation analysis or discourse analysis.so I knew it [qualitative research] would take time.. [And] I thought maybe I need to be gifted in literary writing.to tell stories more interestingly, more excitingly. I thought writing quantitative study would be easier for at least nonnative speakers of English.’ In choosing a research paradigm despite its probable heavy demands on them, these participants showed an obvious openness to new ‘mastery experiences,’ which, in Bandura’s view (1994), is “the most effective way of creating a strong sense of efficacy” (p. 72).

Social modeling and social persuasion, two other wellsprings of self-efficacy according to Bandura (1994), functioned for the study participants in ways that would probably be similar for L1 dissertation writers as well. Social modeling as an efficacy source consists of observing others like oneself succeed at various tasks: the more assumed similarity between the model and the observer, the more persuasive, Bandura argues, is the model’s behavior. Support groups can be an especially effective type of social modeling. Chantsavang formed her own informal support group of friends who were also writing qualitative dissertations: ‘Oh, my friends, they are so great. Without them I couldn’t survive. .I found myself drowning in data.I discussed what problems I had, and they discussed their problems, and we tend to exchange our opinions.’ Social models, however, need not always be personal acquaintances. For Liang, textual models provided a virtual support group. When struggling with writing up her data, she went back to ‘tons of articles’ in the qualitative research literature: ‘Reading helps me a lot.because at the moment I need to write, so I really read carefully how do TESOL scholars do their discourse analysis.’ In their real-life and virtual social models, Chantsavang and Liang found “the competencies to which they aspire[d]” (Bandura, 1994, p. 72).

Unlike social modeling, usually associated with perceived peers, social persuasion relies more on expert coaches, or efficacy builders, as Bandura (1994) calls them, people who shepherd others through guided mastery experiences, situations structured to lead to success. Mentioned more often than any other efficacy builder in our interviews was one particularly accomplished qualitative methodologist whom almost all the participants had studied with, a professor that Chantsavang would visualize in the field when facing a particularly intractable problem. An inspiring lecturer and writer, this professor was also notable for her scaffolding strategies. According to Chantsavang, Jin, and others, this ‘social persuader’ not only initiated them into qualitative inquiry but helped them develop the resources to maintain commitment to it.

At first sight, stress management seems a less significant source of self-efficacy than the others discussed above. Though certainly not sufficient for completion of a major task, lack of stress management can lead to downward-spiraling anxiety and depression that can make completion impossible. Of all the study participants, Liang was the most forthcoming about the stress of dissertation writing. ‘This trip is lonely,’ she remarked, yet Liang also pronounced it a ‘very good experience for myself.’ Her efforts to cope with loneliness exposed another dissertation stressor, distancing from loved ones: ‘Even every time I talk to my husband—he’s the only person I can talk to—but he told me, ‘Please don’t talk to me anymore. It’s too complicated.’ This communication breakdown, however, underscored for Liang how far from ordinary her thought processes had become—‘Oh my goodness,’ she commented, ‘I don’t know my brain.it’s so complicated.’—and how deeply committed to and immersed in her research she was.

Despite the obvious resourcefulness and determination of all the participants in this study, i.e., the multiple sources of increased self-efficacy, hence sustained motivation, evident in the dissertation experiences of all of them, they all also appeared hesitant to openly acknowledge possessing a quality that, according to Bandura (1994), is virtually synonymous with self-efficacy: high assurance in their own capabilities. All six reported having had serious doubts about their own abilities to conduct and write up qualitative research, although they clearly were aware of growth in self-confidence as their projects reached completion. Even in the midst of their accounts of self-doubt, however, there was a subtext that we occasionally saw glimmers of, suggesting that their self-assessments may have contained more than a small amount of self-deprecation (though this is not meant to suggest that they did not genuinely have self-doubts). For example, if we read between the lines of Tanaka’s account of her ‘ignorance,’ we sense someone more confident in her intelligence than she is willing to admit:

.maybe they [fellow students] got the impression that I was good at qualitative or something because I asked her [the professor] many stupid questions. But as a student, I was more comfortable in Dr X’s course.. But for more qualitative people, Dr X seems to be a kind of goddess in the field, so they say that they can’t ask questions.. Since I’m so ignorant, I asked her so many bad questions.. Very fundamental, primitive questions really. I.I said.what’s the difference between journalism and qualitative study?’ (authors’ emphasis)

Of course, the question that Tanaka refers to above was far from ‘primitive’ and actually one that many others have raised, as there are indeed striking similarities between journalistic investigative practices and qualitative research methods (e.g., see Stuhlmiller, 2001, on the narrative interview process). Tanaka’s very reiteration of her assessment of her own questions indicated, at least to us, her interviewers, a strong desire to appear modest while providing an account that suggested she had the courage to raise questions others were too intimidated to ask. Taking our participants’ self-appraisals at face value thus seems not to tell the whole story of their actual appreciation of their own abilities. It is the case, however, that all of the participants spoke repeatedly of their misgivings about their abilities and of the daunting size of the challenges they faced, to some degree or another. What seems more telling to us, though, than any of their verbal self-assessments is the fact that of the six participants, all have now obtained their doctorates. Clearly all the students possessed enough belief in their capabilities, however conflicted or unarticulated, to succeed as qualitative dissertation writers.

# 8. Conclusion

One might assume that, in order to succeed in coping with as ‘fuzzy’ a genre and imposing a task as the qualitative dissertation, intrinsic motivation would be essential to success. Half of our informants indeed exhibited this type of orientation. The other half, however, just as conspicuously did not, especially not initially, although as noted above, in describing their completed projects they employed terms very similar to the language of intrinsic motivation—revealing awareness of the ‘beauty’ of qualitative research and pride in the knowledge gained by way of qualitative methods. It is our hope that our accounts of our six participants will help readers “experience vicariously unique situations” (Donmoyer, 1990) that they will find relevant to many other dissertation writing contexts, and that they will be encouraged to consider L2 students’ potential as dissertation writers. The success of both the philosophically committed, intrinsically oriented students and the more pragmatic, topic-driven, extrinsically oriented students in our study, after all, does provide some evidence that students of either type of motivation can succeed with a genre notorious for challenging even those who normally enjoy and feel confident in their writing (Meloy, 1994). Furthermore, that all six of our participants were L2 writers also suggests that there may not be compelling reasons for those who advise L2 doctoral students to discourage them from choosing qualitative research projects. We would like to suggest, moreover, that the determination, mental discipline, and love of learning needed to become a doctoral student in a second language—hand in hand with the strong sense of self-efficacy acquired by navigating the particularly steep obstacle course many L2 learners face at every phase of a doctoral program—are among the qualities most needed to succeed with a qualitative research project. In other words, L2 graduate students may actually have an ‘edge’ over L1 students in being forced to play the Ginger Rogers role to their L1 peers’ Fred Astaire, doing everything that Fred does but in high heels and backwards, that is, with heightened awareness as L2 users of what they are accomplishing. We know of no L2 graduate students, however, who would openly agree with us they are in any way advantaged as qualitative writers.

In spite of the striking success of the six students in our study, we want to point out that there is still a need to consider how to provide more support for L2 (and L1) writers during their qualitative dissertation experience. Again, we worked with only six L2 qualitative dissertation writers, all of whom met their goals. We have no idea how many L2 qualitative dissertation writers never complete their projects, although in the particular program we worked with most did. Furthermore, it is difficult for us, and we hope for our readers, to lose sight of the vividly detailed accounts of our participants’ struggles with the dissertation process. Even the intrinsically motivated, those most passionate about qualitative methodology, described dispiritingly long, seemingly unproductive days and nights of struggle over the observing/reflecting, reading/writing-as-discovery process. Perhaps there is no way to make the qualitative dissertation process much easier, but there may be ways of making it less painful, especially with regard to sometimes temporarily paralyzing afflictions of self-doubt during the process. Meloy (1994) suggests, and we think rightly, that even those who normally view themselves as skilled writers may “need support for.writing choices” in the midst of writing up qualitative dissertation research (p. 10). Perhaps advisors should not just make themselves available to qualitative dissertation writers but also proactively offer themselves as sounding boards on a regular basis. Obviously, such offers of help could be useful to all dissertation writers, no matter the research paradigm, though we feel that the qualitative paradigm, informed as it is by an epistemology that seeks to promote empathic, experimental understanding, rather than a verificationist conception of knowledge (Eisner, 1997), places an especially heavy burden on writers. Encouraging the ‘talking through’ of problems with a more knowledgeable other is not only a type of scaffolding needed by novices but good habit formation for life as a professional academic as well.

In addition to intellectual support, which may well help self-doubting students emotionally too, more direct support for emotional issues should also be seriously considered. Wincup (2001) argues that when teaching students to be qualitative researchers, we should also think in terms of teaching coping strategies: “Strategies for helping students cope with negative emotional effects, such as anger or distress, need to be incorporated into teaching, training, and supervision.and be combined with an appreciation of how emotions are also a positive aspect of qualitative research.” (p. 32). Although Wincup was referring more specifically to the emotional stress of the qualitative researcher’s close involvement with participants who may be coping with difficult life experiences, her suggestion seems especially apt for all the emotional demands of the qualitative research process, including the distress and even anger novice researchers may feel towards themselves as seemingly inept observers, thinkers, and writers. If experienced researchers would more often share their own research and writing process experiences with novices, it might go far toward persuading novices that such feelings are not unusual (see Casanave & Vandrick, 2003), especially for a research process that puts a premium on thinking that is emergent, research contexts that are natural, and researchers who are selfreflexive and socially sensitive. After all, while qualitative researchers very likely become more confident in their abilities as their experience as researchers grows, whenever they enter a new research project, they can never be sure what will emerge, how their own subject positions, or vantage points, will help or hinder them, or what impact their empathic engagement with participants as individual thinking, feeling, seldom problem-free people will have on them. It seems to us that L2 (and L1) novice qualitative researchers could benefit from the same sensitivity and attentiveness to individuals and their local situations that all qualitative researchers are trained to bring to any research context.

Our experience with our six participants makes us feel hopeful that in the not-toodistant future, when students such as the ones in this study are dissertation advisors themselves, they will not soon forget their own experiences and will be the better for it as faculty mentors: that they will be open about the difficulties, enthusiastic about what can be gained, and able to anticipate the needs of novice qualitative writers. We hope that, as faculty, they will respond as Liang said she would if faced with advising someone contemplating a qualitative dissertation:

It’s a lot of reflective procedures. It’s very difficult.. But I’ll encourage them to do qualitative [if that is their preference].because it’s very humane.. For me, research is warm. It.should fill your senses.[and] qualitative.can offer more of that kind of feeling.

# Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank the six participating dissertation writers, without whose willingness to share their stories this study would not have been possible; Guiling Hu, whose careful and efficient transcribing of the interviews the authors depended on; and Ilona Leki and the anonymous $J E A P$ reviewers, whose encouraging feedback made readers’ needs and interests much easier to envision.

# Appendix

Interview questions

1. What influenced your decision to choose a qualitative or quantitative approach to your dissertation research?

A. Prior coursework? (Did it predispose choice of one or the other paradigm?)   
B. Topic choice? (Does topic select paradigm or paradigm select topic?)   
C. Prior writing experience? (Which paradigm is considered more/less challenging?)   
D. Prior reading experience, i.e., preferred articles? (Were certain researchers especially influential, as writers and/or methodologists?)   
E. Other graduate students’ experiences with the paradigm?   
F. Publication/career prospects here or in home country?   
G. Practical constraints? Time? Money?

2. Do you see your choice of qualitative or quantitative research methods as mainly a philosophical commitment or a pragmatic decision (or some combination)? (Mainly a follow-up on #1, asking for some weighting of decision factors.)

3. How was the research experience constructed? How were research problems resolved? (What kind of support was sought, e.g., with research design, analysis, other expert methodological advice?)

Are you pleased that you chose the qualitative or quantitative approach?

A. Did the approach allow you to investigate your area of interest to your satisfaction?   
B. Were there unavoidable limitations that you could address in future with the opposite approach or more of the same approach?   
C. Would you make the same choice all over again?

5. Was the process of writing up your dissertation research what you expected? How did the research paradigm affect your writing process?

A. Were there cognitive/composing process challenges? If so, how were they met?   
B. What linguistic/rhetorical issues arose during the writing process? If so, how were they met?   
C. What were the most helpful sources of support for the writing process: advisor, committee members, student support group, writing center, hired editor?

6. What would you advise other L2 students to keep in mind when choosing their dissertation research paradigm?

# References

Allison, D., Cooley, L., Lewkowicz, J., & Nunan, D. (1998). Dissertation writing in action: The development of a dissertation writing support program for ESL graduate research students. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 199–217.   
Bandura, R. (1994). Self-efficacy. In V. S. Ramachaudran, Encyclopedia of human behavior (Vol. 4) (pp. 71–81). New York: Academic Press.   
Belcher, D. (1994). The apprenticeship approach to advanced academic literacy: Graduate students and their mentors. English for Specific Purposes, 13, 23–34.   
Belcher, D. (1999). Review of Judith Meloy’s Writing the qualitative dissertation: understanding by doing. English for Specific Purposes, 18, 375–378.   
Casanave, C. (2002). Writing Games. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Casanave, C., & Vandrick, S. (2003). Writing for scholarly publication: Behind the scenes in language education. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Chang, Y., & Swales, J. (1999). Informal elements in English academic writing: Threats or opportunities for nonnative speakers?. In C. Candlin, & K. Hyland (Eds.), Writing: Texts, processes, and practices (pp. 145–167). London: Longman.   
Csikszentmihalyi, M. (1975). Beyond boredom and anxiety. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass.   
Denzin, N., & Lincoln, Y. (Eds.). (2000). Handbook of qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Dong, Y. R. (1998). Non-native graduate students’ thesis/dissertation writing in science: Self-reports by students and their advisors in two U.S. institutions. English for Specific Purposes, 17, 369–390.   
Donmoyer, R. (1990). Generalizability and the single-case study. In E. Eisner (Ed.), Qualitative inquiry in education: The continuing debate (pp. 175–200). New York: Teachers College Press.   
Eisner, E. (1997). The promise and perils of alternative forms of data representation. Educational Researcher, 26, 4–10.   
Flowerdew, J. (1999). Problems in writing for scholarly publication in English: The case of Hong Kong. Journal of Second Language Writing, 8, 243–264.   
Gilbert, G. N., & Mulkay, N. (1984). Opening Pandora’s box: A sociological analysis of scientific discourse. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Hirvela, A., & Belcher, D. (2001). Coming back to voice: The multiple voices and identities of mature multilingual writers. Journal of Second Language Writing, 10, 83–106.   
Hyland, K. (2004). Response to colloquium, advanced academic literacy in the world. Annual Conference of the American Association for Applied Linguistics, Portland, OR.   
Lave, J., & Wenger, E. (1991). Situated cognition: Legitimate peripheral participation. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Medway, P. (2002). Fuzzy genres and community identities: The case of architecture students’ sketchbooks. In R. Coe, L. Lingard, & T. Teslenko (Eds.), The rhetoric and ideology of genre (pp. 123–154). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.   
Meloy, J. (1994). Writing the qualitative dissertation: Understanding by doing. Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Noels, K. (2001). New orientations in language learning motivation: Towards a model of intrinsic, extrinsic, and integrative orientations and motivation. In Z. Dornyei, & R. Schmidt (Eds.), Motivation and second language acquisition (pp. 42–68). Honolulu: University of Hawai’i Press.   
Paltridge, B. (2002). Thesis and dissertation writing: An examination of published advice and actual practice. English for Specific Purposes, 21, 125–143.   
Prior, P. (1998). Writing/disciplinarity: A sociohistoric account of literate activity in the academy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Richardson, L. (2000). Writing: A method of inquiry. In N. Denzin, & Y. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of qualitative research (pp. 923–948). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Rossman, G., & Rallis, S. (2003). Learning in the field: An introduction to qualitative research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage.   
Silva, T., Reichelt, M., & Lax-Farr, J. (1994). Writing instruction for ESL graduate students: Examining issues and raising questions. ELT Journal, 48, 197–204.   
Starfield, S. (2003). The evolution of a dissertation writing course for arts and social sciences research students: What can applied linguistics offer? Hong Kong Journal of Applied Linguistics, 8(2), 137–154.   
Stuhlmiller, C. (2001). Narrative methods in qualitative research: Potential for therapeutic transformation. In K. Gilbert (Ed.), The emotional nature of qualitative research (pp. 63–80). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.   
Swales, J. (1990). Genre analysis. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press.   
Swales, J., & Lindemann, S. (2002). Teaching the literature review to international graduate students. In A. Johns (Ed.), Genre in the classroom (pp. 105–120). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Swales, J., & Luebs, M. (2002). Genre analysis and the advanced second language writer. In E. Barton, & G. Stygall (Eds.), Discourse studies in composition (pp. 135–154). Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press.   
Wenger, E., McDermott, & Snyder, W. (2002). Cultivating communities of practice. Boston, MA: Harvard Business School Press.   
Wincup, E. (2001). Feminist research with women awaiting trial: The effects on participants in the qualitative process. In K. Gilbert (Ed.), The emotional nature of qualitative research (pp. 17–35). Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press.   
Wolcott, H. (1990). Writing up qualitative research. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.

Diane Belcher, an associate professor at Georgia State University, co-edits the journal English for Specific Purposes as well as a teacher reference series, Michigan Series on Teaching Multilingual Writers. She has also co-edited three books: Academic writing in a second language (1995), Linking literacies (2001), and Reflections on multiliterate lives (2001).

Alan Hirvela, an assistant professor of foreign/second language education at Ohio State University, has published articles in a number of journals, including ELT Journal, the Journal of Second Language Writing, and TESOL Journal, and has most recently authored a book titled Connecting reading and writing in second language writing instruction (2004).