# Fostering transformative practitioners for critical EAP: Possibilities and challenges

Brian Morgan\*

Department of English, Glendon College/York University, 2275 Bayview Avenue, Toronto, ON M4N 3M6, Canada

# Abstract

In this article, I explore the often difficult transfer of theory to practice in respect to promoting the conceptual role of transformative intellectual/practitioner through a pre-service ‘‘social issues project’’ for future EAP and ESL teachers. Following an examination of more established role options in EAP (e.g. technician, reflective practitioner), and the sources of their prominence, I take up the particular ideological and methodological challenges that arise in fostering the role of transformative practitioner for critical EAP. How these challenges are addressed in syllabus design are taken up in the final sections of the paper through a discussion and description of a pre-service group assignment, the ‘‘social issues project’’, in which students conceptualize and design a blueprint for transformative action in various forms such as an advocacy letter, workshop, curricular materials, etc. Reflection on the strengths and weaknesses of several selected projects and the assignment, in general, conclude the article.

$^ { © }$ 2008 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Critical EAP; Critical pedagogy; Language teacher education; Language teacher identity; Transformative practitioner; Emergence; Affordance

# 1. Introduction

Critical EAP allows ESL teachers and students to examine externally imposed demands and negotiate their responses to them, by addressing the following questions: Who formulated these requirements and why? Should they be fulfilled? Should they be modified? What are the consequences of trying to change current conditions? What is gained by obeying, and what is lost? (Benesch, 2001, p. 53)

Reflecting on this quote from Sarah Benesch on critical EAP, I am reminded of how important good questions are in seeing beyond the text at hand or in expanding its reach and relevance. Good questions, in this respect, can inspire new meanings and new ways of acting on the content of learning, which ultimately affects and potentially transforms the broader society in whose service learning is ostensibly directed. Directed towards EAP, these questions effectively model and define the complementary duality that underpins Benesch’s critical approachda focus that promotes attention to both Needs and Rights for EAP students negotiating the impersonal and unfamiliar demands of universities in their second or additional language. As she states, ‘‘critical EAP offers alternatives to unquestioning obedience, assuming that students have the right to interrogate the demands they face’’ (p. 53), a conceptualization of rights that invites teachers to explore pedagogies of critical engagement rather than the passive transmission of disciplinary content, as is conventionally assumed in most EAP settings.

Looking at Benesch’s questions from a slightly different vantage pointdspecifically, my role as a language teacher educator for EAP and ESL programsdI can’t help but wonder about their source. Where does this kind of critical questioning and attention to power relations come from? Is it innate? Does it come about by chance? Or, is it a unique product of prior family and community experiences? In other words, is it something that can’t be taught or developed in the context of a pre-service language teacher education course? I believe not. But I also strongly suspect that such critical understanding can’t be transferred nor acquired through the same intentional and systematic pathways by which we might present more conventionalized content knowledge and pedagogical content knowledge within a language teacher education (LTE) program. That is, the immediate and directed learning of new techniques to teach L2 academic vocabulary, for example, is of a different kind and type as the recursive processes of critical reflection and emergent understandings that facilitate a transformative potential in EAP teachers.

The notion of emergence, here, refers to collaborative and integrative knowledge generation ‘‘greater than the sum of its parts’’, i.e. of a higher conceptual order, complexity, task-directed insight or context-sensitivity than what individuals might accomplish on their own (cf. ‘‘thought collectives’’, Ramanathan, 2002; van Lier, 2004). Towards its realization in teacher education, descriptors of process (‘‘facilitate’’) and of outcome (‘‘potential’’) are carefully and deliberately applied. They underpin a notion of a pre-service syllabus designed towards the creation of possibilities rather than certainties, one that attends to learning opportunities through which student-teachers might (re)conceptualize new roles and responsibilities for themselves as exemplified in the kinds of problem-posing questions and responses advanced by Benesch in the service of critical EAP. Towards this potential in EAP, I will describe my efforts in promoting the conceptual role of transformative practitioner through an Issues Analysis Project (IAP), a final group assignment for a three-credit course called Socio-Political Issues in Second Language Education (LING 3600.3) a required course in a TESOL certificate program offered through my university.

# 2. Available conceptual roles in EAP: the issue of content

The conceptual roles we promote in LTEdwhether technician, reflective practitioner, or transformative intellectual (e.g. Kumaravadivelu, 2003, chap. 1)dafford both insights and blind spots down the road. All conceptual roles infer a notion of paradigm (e.g. Guba & Lincoln, 1990; Lynch, 1996) regarding what is real and knowable, how such realities might best be discovered via research, and the extent to which they might be transformed through individual and collective initiatives, some of which clearly have pedagogical implications. These types of paradigmatic assumptions thus serve to normalize particular social values and curricular expectationsdnot to mention attitudes and insecurities.

Of the latter, perhaps the most commonly noted source of insecurity in EAP arises in respect to disciplinary content and the level of subject expertise required of the EAP professional. In a survey article on English for Specific Purposes (ESP), for example, Belcher’s (2006) sub-title, ‘‘Rescripting instructional roles: Who teaches whom?’’ (p. 139) illustrates the anxieties faced when addressing content areas beyond one’s worldly and professional comfort zones. Within this section, she cites researchers who warn about the harm potentially incurred by those who ‘‘attempt to be ‘pseudoresearcher[s] of subject matter’’’ (Robinson, cited in Belcher, p. 140)da particularly unflattering conceptual role.

Nonetheless, the reality is that EAP instructors often find themselves knowing considerably less about specialized content than the international graduate students or foreign-trained professionals they are required to teach. In such situations, the typical role parameters offered the EAP professional encompass varied degrees of collaboration with students and colleagues (e.g. ‘‘classroom organizer’’, ‘‘consultant’’; Dudley-Evans & St. John, 1998, pp. 13e14) based on the subject-area specificity involved. Under such conditions, the conceptual role of technician is most commonly invoked. The job of the EAP specialist, particularly in linked classes (e.g. an EAP tutorial for students taking Introduction to Sociology, for example) or team-teaching arrangements with subject specialists, becomes one reduced to the provision of language support, a service provider of insights on the specific communicative needs (e.g. genres, registers, knowledge-display tasks) of particular academic disciplines.

Yet, as persuasively argued by Benesch (2001) and Pennycook (1997), the collaboration intended for linked and team-teaching arrangements often results in the subordination of the EAP enterprise to more prestigious disciplinary fields, in large part, a reflection of paradigmatic assumptions and ideologies in which language is presumed to be independent from the objects and knowledge forms it describes and represents; that is, language is presumed to be a neutral medium or conduit of information rather than an inseparable element of disciplinary understanding and development. Even in lower-level, English for General Academic Purposes courses, where EAP instructors are responsible for both academic language skills and course subject matter, the treatment of content can still serve as a source of professional uncertainty as the instructor is expected to cover an extensive set of disciplinary themes and issues, even fictional and non-fictional genres, invariably resulting in the superficial coverage or trivialization of less familiar areas (e.g. Pennycook, 1997, pp. 260e261). This diversification of generalized content serves, yet again, to normalize the conceptual role of technician (i.e. the language-support specialist) as the norm in EAP.

Given these conditions of practice, and the language ideologies of neutrality that have informed EAP and ESP research, the extent to which the alternative role of reflective practitioner might be available to new EAP instructors would be limited. Most likely, Schon’s consciousness-raising notions of ‘‘reflection-on-action’’ and ‘‘reflection-inaction’’ in LTE (see Kumaravadivelu, 2003, pp. 10e11) would be restricted to pragmatic concernsdi.e. the efficiency of the teaching methods employed in covering subject area genres and vocabulary, for example, rather than reflection on the cultural biases of the methods chosen or investigation of the socio-political underpinnings of the content involved and the specific rhetorical or semiotic resources deployed in the production of disciplinary neutrality.

In sum, the dominant role of technician renders the EAP ‘‘partner’’ as a facilitator rather than contributor or creator of disciplinary knowledge. Although prevalent in the EAP field, it is a role inadequate for the goals of critical EAP as developed by Benesch, who rejects the subordinate status conventionally assigned EAP instructors. As exemplified by her classroom treatment of anorexia in a linked EAP-psychology course (Benesch, 1998), subject-area content can provide unique, intercultural opportunities for consciousness-raising and critical inquiryde.g. the social and gendered sources of this illnessdin addition to the specific linguistic and textual requirements of academic discourse communities.

# 3. Promoting a transformative role in critical EAP: tension points

I now direct my discussion towards the role of transformative practitioner, a conceptual role that I see as foundational to the realization of critical EAP and one originating in critical pedagogy and the work of educational researchers such as Henry Giroux (1988), Roger Simon (1992), Peter McLaren (1989), and Ira Shor (1992). Critical pedagogy’s underpinnings draw inspiration from several sources, most notably, the educational philosophy of Paulo Freire; Marxism, particularly through the critical theory of the Frankfurt School; postmodern notions of power/ knowledge, discourse and subjectivity as developed by Foucault; Bourdieu’s research on social class maintenance/ reproduction via education (cf. cultural and symbolic capital); the Birmingham School of Contemporary Cultural Studies, and the work of Stuart Hall and Raymond Williams; as well as feminist researchers in education such as Kathleen Weiler, Jennifer Gore and Carmen Luke.

These theoretical foundations, as a whole, provide a comprehensive set of discourse-analytic tools with which to historicize and politicize disciplinary claims to knowledge, revealing the social interests advanced or maintained through current arrangements. Such tools, similarly, generate critical insights on contested domains of presumed research objectivity and draw attention to the particularistic, cultural sources of universalized values and practices. Critical pedagogy, in this light, offers a number of principled positions from which the conceptual role of technician can be rejected as the only professional role available to EAP teachers.

Critical pedagogy’s influences on EAP research and practice can be seen in the work of several in the field. In addition to Benesch, I would mention scholar-practitioners such as Suresh Canagarajah, Ryuko Kubota, Kumaravadivelu, Cynthia Nelson, Bonny Norton, Alastair Pennycook, Sue Starfield, Stephanie Vandrick, and Shelley Wong, to name a few. In the area of LTE, where exposure to professional roles in EAP such as transformative practitioner is initiated, there have been a few notable examples of critical work related to pre-service contexts and issues (e.g. Clarke, 2008; Crookes & Lehner, n.d.; Lin, 2004; Pennycook, 2004; Ramanathan, 2002; Reagan & Osborn, 2002; Te´llez & Waxman, 2006).

While there are theoretical and pedagogical points of difference within the critical field, in common is the assumption that educators need to research issues of ideology, power and inequality and that second/additional language teaching in contexts such as EAP can and should serve as a vehicle for institutional change and the promotion of social justice both within and beyond the university. Towards this end, the transformative practitioner in EAP is required to look at the ‘‘bigger picture’’ and become aware of the larger socio-political and economic conditions (e.g. globalization, neoliberalism) that shape educational agendas, academic rules and curricula, and the disciplinary content students are required to learn. Such macro awareness helps practitioners recognize opportunities for transformative work at the micro level of the classroom, for example, in helping EAP students recognize the lexico-grammatical elements of powerful texts and of rhetorically persuasive forms of discourse with which to negotiate more equitable course arrangements. In EAP classrooms, as well, the knowledge base of critical pedagogies encourage greater participatory learning communities (Auerbach, 2000) in which students social and L1 experiences are utilized as valid problem-posing resources around academic subject matter in EAP lessons.

Still, in considering the preparation of new teachers in LTE, we might reflect on why critical EAP and the supporting role of transformative practitioner have remained somewhat marginal to the field. As discussed above in respect to content expertise, one of the key obstacles is the predominant assumption that EAP is essentially pragmaticdan ideologically neutral activity focused on the provision of specialized language services in support of more prestigious disciplines in the academy (e.g. Benesch, 2001). This uncritical stance regarding content is compounded by dominant discourses of neutrality and scientificity in many academic fields, particularly in the natural sciences, where disciplinary objectivity and universality are less frequently challenged and where the relevance of critical theories and pedagogies would be unimaginable for many insiders.

At the same time, not all barriers to the expansion of Critical EAP activities should be seen as external to the critical enterpriseda consequence of unfamiliarity and resistance to what transformative practitioners have to offer. Indeed, some of the obstacles might be characterized as field-internal, elements of critical theory and research that partially explain why concrete examples of transformative pedagogies have been in relatively short supply, particularly as exemplars for new teachers seeking to develop a conceptual role for themselves as they embark on a professional career in EAP. Following Benesch’s problem-posing framework, I would like to pose a few questions of my own, which address important cautionary concerns in preparing teachers for critical EAP:

1) Are the key texts that promote critical pedagogies inaccessible and over-theorized?

Bill Johnston (2002), whose research on values in English Language Teaching raises ideological issues of common cause, still notes the tendency for ‘‘a lot of writing about critical pedagogy to be too abstract, theoretical, and couched in exclusionary language; in this I believe that many theorists have failed in their moral obligation to make their ideas fully accessible to others, especially practicing teachers’’ (p. 70). Johnston’s point is well taken in that critical work in education should be more responsive to pre-service needsdthe provision of guidelines and descriptions of pedagogy grounded in EAP teachers’ experiences and ways of knowing. My response in the socio-politics course (LING 3600) has been to increase the number of readings that combine theory with practice and that describe teachers’ decisionmaking processes in taking up a transformative role within particular institutional constraints and course responsibilities. In the course kit, Benesch’s (1998) feminist treatment of anorexia and Thompson’s (2002) article, which addresses aboriginal rights in Australia as part of a workshop on critical thinking in academic research, are two good examples I use to demonstrate how a critical engagement with content might be realized in an EAP setting.

# 2) Do we inadvertently promote pedagogies of despair and pessimism?

A couple of years ago, I had a student in my pre-service course tell me she no longer wished to teach EAP or EFL overseas, the course materials we had been reading on the geopolitics of English implicated her in a profession of which she no longer wanted to be part. It’s important to consider the meanings students might produce around provocative metaphors such as linguistic imperialism (Phillipson, 1992), linguistic genocide (Skutnabb-Kangas, 2000), or monoculturalization (Modiano, 2004), as a few examples. While it is important for students to understand the negative consequences of the global spread of English, we should also take care to provide them with texts that speak to the many joys of language teaching and, as Benesch (2001, pp. 49e51) argues, offer hope and dialogue (cf. Freire) along with critical inquiry.

3) To what extent do we exaggerate the capacity for teachers to become change agents?

By promoting and validating the notion of a transformative practitioner for EAP, there is a risk of conveying unrealistic expectations regarding the changes teachers can make and the professional risks and responsibilities they should reasonably assume. Such promotion may also create or sustain unrealistic expectations from university administrators or decision-makers intent on cutting costs while increasing teachers’ workloads.

In the growing research literature on language teacher identity (e.g. Clarke, 2008; Duff & Uchida, 1997; Hawkins & Norton, in press; Johnston, 1999; Lin, Wang, Akamatsu & Riazi, 2002; Morgan, 2004; Motha, 2006; Pavlenko, 2003; Tsui, 2007; Varghese, Morgan, Johnston & Johnson, 2005), there are important elements of critical selfreflection and individual development that might also be open to co-optation. Though most of us who do critical research in this area describe the ways in which identity or subjectivity is shaped by larger discourses and ideologies, we also reiterate the capacitydif not the responsibilitydfor teachers to exercise their agency, to search within themselves for some counter-discursive quality with which to redress the social injustices and institutional obstacles they encounter. When such ‘‘changes from below’’ are unrealized in the academy, blame can be transferred onto the agentive inadequacies of the individualized teacherdhis or her ‘‘failure’’ to empower students socially and academically, or to build ‘‘collaborative relations of power’’ through teacher-student interactions (e.g. Cummins, 2001).

Perhaps one of the reasons that the conceptual role of technician remains prevalent in EAP is that many teachersdcontract faculty without collective bargaining, for exampledare relatively powerless to work towards change and hence are clearly uncomfortable with the agency conferred upon them through critical theory. Recognizing this concern, I include a number of readings in the socio-politics course that offer a diversity of forms and ways of doing transformative work in EAP and ESL settings. The IAP assignment format, as well, encourages a plurality of interventions, some more pedagogical and others requiring varying degrees of social and institutional advocacy. I also provide readings that critically address critical pedagogies in EAP and ESL (e.g. Clarke, 2003, chap. 6; Johnston, 2002, chap. 3). This latter point leads to the following crucial question of how we engage with students who, in spite of our efforts, reject a transformative role for themselves.

4) Defining a transformative agenda for EAP: Towards what end and whose vision in pre-service LTE?

In diverse classrooms, whether EAP or LTE, which forms of systemic inequality become the subject matter of critical inquiry for content-based instructionde.g. class-blindness or color-blindness? Another concern arises in how well we strike a balance between absolutism and relativism in what we accept as evidence of transformative outcomes and processes. As teachers deeply committed to social and institutional change, are we prone to taking ourselves and our most valued theories too seriously? How will we respond to students who reject our ‘‘truths’’?

It is not easy for a teacher to have one’s values, even when based on a lifetime of rich experience, rejected by students. Nonetheless, when sharing ideas about course content, it is crucial to present the critical perspective (and the transformative practitioner’s role) as an option, not as a requirement. It is also important to maintain a degree of ‘‘productive doubt’’ around prior beliefsdeven our most cherished onesdin our dialogic interactions with students. As Benesch (2001) notes, ‘‘provoking a desire to interrogate the status quo.is not achieved by critical teachers imposing their vision or political agenda on students’’ (p. 51).

# 4. From theory to practice: challenges for syllabus design

The four questions/tensions I have posed suggest, in part, a number of theoretical concerns, professional expectations and interpersonal relations that might discourage pre-service, LTE students from adopting the role of transformative practitioner for EAP. By reflecting on these issues, and seeking ways of mediating their effects on pedagogy, we are better situated in accomplishing the difficult task of moving from theory to practice, or a theoretically informed practice in a pre-service LTE setting.

To reiterate a point made in the introduction, the work of fostering a transformative practitioner’s role for critical EAP may involve and integrate different forms and pathways of learning; that is, we can’t develop a transformative or liberatory competency, for example, in the same way we might promote grammatical or methodological competency in LTE. This point is nicely explained by Mark Clarke (2003):

‘‘Empower’’ and ‘‘liberate’’ are not transitive verbs. Grammatically, of course, this is not true; both verbs require objects and therefore are transitive.. Pragmatically, however, the matter is not so straightforward. Empowerment and liberation are not serums that can be administered to other. They are not states of grace that we confer on our students. We do not empower others by declaring them to be liberated, nor can we harass them into being empowered. In other words, liberation education is not a direct-instruction phenomenon. The best we can do is work to create the conditions under which students will begin to take the initiative. (p. 175)

Following Clarke’s insightful observation, I wish to outline, briefly, what I see as the key elements involved in creating optimal conditions to foster a transformative or liberatory awareness in a pre-service LTE setting.

A. Attention to situated constraints, institutional power relations   
B. Attention to textual patterns & cycles (sequencing/combination) of texts, including talk about and around texts (cf. inter-textuality, Bazerman, 2004)   
C. Attention to multimodal resources (digital, visual, print, gestured, spatial) and their ‘‘affordances’’ (cf. Kress, 2003; van Lier, 2004)   
D. Students as active meaning makers and not passive recipients   
E. Teacher/Student identities as texts (Morgan, 2004)   
F. Critical/Transformative awareness as an emergent phenomenon, potentially arising from the interaction of all the points above

Point A reiterates the duality of Needs and Rights introduced by Benesch (2001)d‘‘needs’’ in response to specific institutional and academic requirements for EAP/ESL teacher certification; ‘‘rights’’ through pedagogies that examine the socio-politics of these requirements and the possible spaces and opportunities by which they might be mediated or changed. Such critical awareness, as Clarke suggests above, is ‘‘not a direct-instruction phenomenon.’’ It is, instead, an emergent phenomenon (Point F) arising through the articulation of many factors (e.g. all the points above) and through continuous reflection and collaboration around content and activities. Most importantly, it doesn’t necessarily come about the same waydif at alldfor each student in the class. This is where the notion of ‘‘affordance’’ is significant (Point C).1 A course reading or related activity may have the potential for critical consciencization (cf. Freire), but the full extent of this potential does not lie bounded and intact within the text itself or method of instruction alone. Rather, it is a co-constructed alignment or shared opportunity dependent as well on a student’s specific needs, memories, and abilitiesdat a given momentdto perceive and utilize this meaning potential in order to realize particular self-directed goals, transformative or otherwise. As van Lier (2004) explains, ‘‘affordances are detected, picked up, and acted upon as part of a person’s resonating with, or being in tune with, her or his environment .. This means that when we perceive something, we perceive it as it relates to us. So, the object [e.g. an EAP text, activity, or lesson] . is not ‘as it is,’ but ‘as it is to me’’’ (p. 91). A notion of affordance, in this sense, underpins the non-linear, non-directive challenge critical educators must address in the creation of possibilities rather than certainties through syllabus design.

Towards this achievement, a critical potential is fostered through multiple readings of texts (e.g. informational, experiential, critical analytic, oppositional) realized and contextualized by question prompts, focused group work and teacher talk (Points B, D). Such awareness is enhanced as well by creating opportunities for students to construct their own critical insights across texts and across lessonsdto conceptualize larger meta-lessons that give relevance and coherence to the transformative roles they might wish to adopt. A transformative potential is also encouraged through the strategic sequencing and utilization of multimodal resources (digital, visual, spatial, etc.), each modality engaging identities and meaning-making in ways unmet by other modes (Point C). Finally, a teacher’s identity is itself a textual resource (Point E), co-constructed with students and potentially deployed in transformative ways that invigorate course content and meaning-making (cf. Simon’s notion of ‘‘image-text’’, Morgan 2004).

The following sections of this article now turn to my efforts at bridging theory and practice in ways that foster a transformative role for new teachers entering EAP and ESL settings. I will focus on one assignment, in particular, the

Issues Analysis Project, which is the final assignment of a pre-service course I teach called Socio-Political Issues in Second Language Teaching.

# 5. LING 3600 3.0: socio-political issues in second language teaching

LING 3600 is a three-credit, required course as part of the York University TESOL Certificate Programme. The certificate itself is 30-credits (see website: http://dlll.yorku.ca/tesol/) which is equivalent to five full-year university courses, a substantial commitment of time and money for students. The certificate program is designed to conform to TESL Ontario certification program standards (http://www.teslontario.org/new/cert/cert_prgstds.htm), which in turn allows certificate holders to teach in the better paying non-credit, adult ESL and EAP programs in the province of Ontario. The program attracts both domestic and international students from a wide variety of ethno-linguistic, academic and professional backgrounds. Some students are relatively young and complete the certificate concurrent with their undergraduate studies. Many post-graduates with years of work experiencedand some nearing retirement agedenroll with thoughts of a career change or travel-work opportunities. These varied experiences and interests enrich the kinds of conversations that take place in class.

The following course description for LING 3600 concisely frames its pre-service aspirations for TESOL:

All second language teaching and learning takes place within a complex socio-political, cultural and economic context. The TESOL professional is able to analyze this context, and understand its influence on the classroom. This course examines the context of TESOL and considers how various issues influence and inform such elements as classroom methodology, leadership, administration, programme design, the role and responsibility of the teacher, the teacher as leader and change agent. Students will be encouraged to select and analyze issues that are relevant to the particular context within which they are, or expect to be, teaching.

The course runs for twelve weeks, and has three assignments: 1) a short response paper based on a single article from a list compiled by the instructor $( 1 0 \% )$ , 2) a mid-term, research essay on a theme related to course issues and content (e.g. Non-Native Speaking Teachers of English; Spirituality and TESOL; Critical Multiculturalism/AntiRacist Pedagogies; Critical EAP; the Geopolitics of English; Language-in-Education Policies in Canada) $(40 \% )$ , 3) issues analysis project $( 3 0 \% )$ , 4) attendance and participation $( 2 0 \% )$ . A twelve week course outline of sequenced readings and themes is attached as Appendix 1.

Beginning around week 7, after the research essays have been submitted, preparation for the IAP begins. By this point of time, and through the sequencing of selected readings, the frames of reference for socio-political issues in SLE has integrated both macro and micro dimensions of the profession and field, examining global and local issues, policies and pedagogies as well as issues of culture and identity, especially from a Canadian perspective. I begin by going over the format (e.g. LING 3600: Issues Analysis Project $[ 3 0 \% ]$ ; Length: 1500e2000 words $^ +$ appendices and bibliography of relevant sources; Group project: 2e4 people) and description and objectives for the assignment, which is in the course outline:

- The premise of this assignment is that the effective teacher is aware of the socio-political context within which she or he works. It also assumes that the instructor has a professional responsibility to attempt to deal with the issues that impact negatively on the teaching-learning process and the situation of second language learners and teachers.   
- The objective of this assignment is to select an issue and structure a response that will at least in some way work towards resolving the issue. In other words, you will produce a blueprint for action that is responsive to the issue identified and could, at least in theory, be carried out as proposed. Your response might be in the form of a new policy, advocacy initiative, curriculum innovation, specialized materials, or an in-service/pre-service workshop for teachers and/or program administrators.

To help students conceptualize a possible ‘‘blueprint for action’’ or ‘‘intervention’’, as I often describe it, I bring in a variety of student examples from previous years. I also describe a number of exemplary projects and publications external to the course. Class time is set aside each week to brainstorm possible topics in small and large groups. Based on these discussions, I bring in supplementary materials and email the class links to Internet sites that might be useful. Part of this supplementation is focussed on the strengths and limitations of specific formats of intervention, a key component of the grade for the IAP. For example, we discuss options for effective, participatory workshops (see e.g. Arnold, Burke, James, Martin & Thomas, 1991; Wallerstein & Auerbach, 2004) and realistic goals within a $^ { 2 - 3 \mathrm { ~ h ~ } }$ time frame. Similarly, we discuss the rhetorical elements and appropriate length of a persuasive advocacy letter to an elected official. In support, I sometimes bring in examples of advocacy resources from the TESOL organization’s website (www.tesol.org), including a few position statements and formal letters to policy makers. In terms of transformative lesson plans and/or curricular units, we look at ways in which they should follow the thematic, taskbased guidelines developed in the Language Instruction for New Canadians (LINC) documents based on the Canadian Language Benchmarks (CLB) (Pawlikowska-Smith, 2000), which is the model most familiar to the student-teachers in our TESOL program.

Another important element that supports the IAP is the selection and sequencing of readings and their focal concerns around this stage of the course. For those interested in a project that addresses aspects of Canadian ESL policy and curricula, the readings from week 6 (Burnaby, Pinet, Haque & Cray) provide detail on the history and current conditions of the profession in the province of Ontario, where a majority of certificate graduates end up teaching. The readings from week 7 (Courcheˆne, Sauve´, Thomson & Derwing) examine and debate Canadian identity and notions of multiculturalism, particularly the representation of diversity within EAP and ESL curricula. Week 8 (Amin, James, Vandrick) takes up broader dimensions of identity (race, gender, sexuality, class).

Another key aspect of the readings for Weeks 7 and 8 is their connection to the TESOL practicum and the university’s content-based EAP course called Canadian Language and Culture, a nine-credit, foundations course (e.g. Mendelsohn, 2001) based around themes such as critical multiculturalism, aboriginal history and rights, gender relations, Quebec nationalism, regional diversity in Canada, and Canadian literature and arts. Many students observe this course as part of their practicum and see, first hand, how EAP instructors integrate academic language instruction with content-based research and development typical of a first year humanities or social sciences course. The LING 3600 readings in Weeks 7 and 8 encourage new teachers to examine ideological blind spots in the subject matter of Canadian national identity and to begin conceptualizing the kinds of problem-posing lessons around content that underpin a transformative practitioner’s role for EAP. The readings for weeks 7and 8 also tend to inform IAP’s designed as workshops, most often to inform teachers and administrators about gaps in current practices and materials around language and identity.

For groups interested in developing their own critical pedagogies (e.g. lesson plans, units, materials) as an IAP, week 9 (Benesch, Thompson, Quinlisk, Morgan) offers many detailed examples for EAP and community-based ESL curricula. The final readings in week 11 (Elson, Forhan & Scheraga) reiterate the larger socio-political contexts for the IAP, and the need for practitioners to advocate on behalf of their students and their profession.

# 6. Selected group projects: implications for critical EAP

There have been many innovative IAP’s in the past. The following table provides an indication of the different types of ‘‘blueprints for action’’ developed in the LING 3600 course:

Space considerations do not allow for a detailed discussion of all the examples in Table 1. I would, however, like to expand on examples 4 and 5 and show how they relate to the fostering of transformative practitioners for critical EAP based on key issues raised in this article.

Project 4 on hidden identities, for example, responds to the unique diversity and challenges of university EAP classrooms in the context of growing internationalization of student populations. As Cynthia Nelson (2005) correctly notes, there is a ‘‘dearth of literature on teaching in a ‘contact zone’ environment that [is] simultaneously transnational, transcultural, multilingual and multisexual’’ (p. 109; her italics). Nelson’s observation reminds us that EAP is not only a process of language socialization but also a simultaneous one of identity negotiationdof developing an effective academic voice across L1 and L2 texts and genres (e.g. Canagarajah, 2004) and of negotiating/confronting identity options some of which were previously unavailable and/or stigmatized in students’ places of origin. Indeed, this latter development is often an inherent dimension of engaging with academic content and its collaborative exploration.

Based on Vandrick’s (1997) TESOL Quarterly article, this group developed a comprehensive lesson plan following the CLB framework. One of the innovative aspects of the lesson was the use of a Power Point display requiring students to match short narratives based on ‘‘hidden’’ identities from Vandrick’s article (e.g. sexuality, class, spirituality, illness, emotional trauma, etc.) with selected images of students, discussing the choices made and how they might impact on second language learning. This activity, enhanced through visual media (Point C above), thus served to sensitize EAP students to possible challenges and additional obstacles being faced by their peers. At the same time, I would argue that this IAP models conceptual strategies that are transferable to the problem-posing of content in an EAP course and that reflect an emergent, non-directive potential, as described above (cf. Clarke, 2003; van Lier, 2004). That is, in ways not unlike Benesch’s (1998) treatment of anorexia, the activity encourages participants to look past or within the visual signifiers of race, gender, or age, and to recognize social complexities, intersections and ‘‘differences within difference’’ that challenge simplistic and essentialized stereotypes. At the same time, it invites participants to examine their own judgement and biases in creating matches between images of students and particular narratives. These types of conceptual strategies are especially transferable to content-based EAP courses such as Canadian Language and Culture, in which critical examination of liberal multiculturalism in the formation of the nation-state imaginary are important course objectives and indicative of what a transformative practitioner would hope to accomplish.

Table 1 Selected IAP’s/Blueprints for Action   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">No. Title</td><td>No. of Students</td><td>Blueprint for Action</td><td>Description/Comments</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>Age Discrimination for Overseas Teaching</td><td>2</td><td>An advocacy letter to the president of TESOL</td><td>Recommendation for official policy related to age discrimination for overseas teaching. Effective use of UN and EU policy documents and Internet ads regarding topic.</td></tr><tr><td>2</td><td>Educators&#x27; Partnerships with New-Immigrant Parents: Strategies for Effective Communication and Involvement</td><td></td><td>3-hour workshop for pre-&amp; in-service K-12 teachers</td><td>An important intervention that responds to the ethnolinguistic diversity of Toronto; includes strategies for increasing parental involvement, intercultural communication and active listening.</td></tr><tr><td>3</td><td>Recommendations for Teaching Culture in an ESL/EAP Classroom of an Afrocentric High School</td><td>1</td><td>recommendations and curricular examples</td><td>Language-in-education policy A critical approach to policy and content, including validation of Caribbean English, for an Afrocentric High School proposed by the Toronto District School Board.</td></tr><tr><td>4</td><td>Teaching Hidden Identities</td><td>4</td><td>2-hour lesson as part of a curriculum unit on Human Rights</td><td>Innovative lesson using PP images of students with matching narratives that give voice to the hidden aspects of identity described by Vandrick (1997).</td></tr><tr><td>5</td><td>A Report on the Cost-Benefits of Computer Assisted Language Learning</td><td>2</td><td>A consultant&#x27;s report for a local board of education</td><td>A careful examination and evaluation of CALL programs vis-a-vis budget constraints.</td></tr></table></body></html>

Project 5 addresses an area of growing research significance for EAP, the influence and contributions of Information Technologies (IT) and Computer-Assisted Language Learning (CALL) in the enhancement of EAP curricula and learner autonomy (see e.g. Beatty, 2003; Chapelle, 2005). Electronic corpora, through concordancing software and other IT-generated data bases have contributed remarkable pedagogical resources such as a new academic word list (Coxhead, 2000), a recent grammar from Longman (e.g. Biber, Johansson, Leech, Conrad & Finegan, 1999), and the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English, featuring ‘‘over 150 speech events, including such interactions as dissertation defences, advising sessions, and seminar discussions’’ (Belcher, 2006, p. 147). The Internet has also become an inescapable, albeit essential, tool for academic life through various digital fora such as listservs, blogs, chat-rooms, electronic journals and books, video-streamed presentations, and distance learning opportunities. The multimedia and hypermedia affordances of the Internet have also made it an attractive resource for extensive reading of L2 texts in support of content-based EAP teaching (Kasper, 2000) as well the development of multiliteracies applicable to the digital multimodality of web-based texts (cf. Kress, 2003).

For critical researchers, technologies are never neutral or disembedded from particular socio-economic interests and ideologies. The ideal for the transformative practitioner in this respect is to both critique and utilize IT in support of the goals of critical EAP as described in this paper (see e.g. Cummins, 2000; Morgan, 2009; Starfield, 2004). Project 5 takes up this dualistic stance through the genre of a consultants’ report, which provides research-supported arguments carefully balanced for and against the cost-benefits involved in CALL for EAP and ESL programming. As the report asks in its introduction, ‘‘are there some particular aspects of ESL/EAP instruction, which are enhanced by the use of computer technology and, if so, what are they? Can the use of computers be justified when comparing the costs involved to those of hiring extra teachers?’’ In short, this report answers with a partial ‘yes’ to the first question in noting the benefits of concordancing programs for generating academic vocabulary and the support for autonomous learning gained through various software programs and through participation in virtual language learning communities. In response to the second question, the report cautions against the financial outlay by pointing out the continuing expenditure for software upgrades and teacher training required in order to utilize the computers purchased. Provocatively, the authors conclude that ‘‘the issue here is not to replace teachers with computers but to emphasize that although computers will not replace teachers, teachers who use computers will replace those who do not.’’ The challenge posed for critical EAP by this last comment is taken up by Cummins (2000): ‘‘Rather than dismissing IT as another corporate plot, .or lamenting its perverse impact on educational priorities, we should acknowledge the fundamental changes that IT is bringing to our societies and seek ways to use its power for transformative purposes’’ (p. 539)dgood advice for aspiring transformative practitioners.

# 7. IAP challenges and successes

Brief summaries of the two IAP’s above fail to illustrate the complex challenges, problems and benefits that arise in their development process, which I briefly turn to in this section. One significant challenge in the process of doing the IAP is student-teachers’ lack of pedagogical and administrative experience in EAPda problem common to all preservice settings. Concurrent to taking LING 3600, many TESOL students in the program are in various stages of doing a $5 0 \mathrm { h }$ practicum ( $3 0 \mathrm { h }$ observation, $2 0 \mathrm { h }$ teaching). Often, they lack the teaching background and institutional knowledge to conceptualize and contextualize a coherent project for change. In spite of considerable timedin class and outddevoted to discussion and critique of various ‘‘blueprints for action’’, some IAP’s remain mired in theory and are somewhat undeliverable as critical interventions for the setting and audience intended. Yet, as these new teachers progress in their careers, build up more practical exposure and understanding of specific institutional constraints, these initial ‘‘shortcomings’’ may be re-conceptualized (e.g. the recursive, meta-lesson, noted above) to provide a foundation for stronger EAP pedagogies that mediate and/or transform existing inequities in their places of work.

Another recurring challenge is the group dimension of the IAP. In the increasingly corporatizing university (see e.g. Starfield, 2004)dwhere individualized competition for grades and entrance to professional degree programs are often preeminent concernsdnot all students appreciate the collective commitment of time and energy involved in realizing a group project. The fact that a common grade is shared by all group members has on occasion been mentioned as a problem point by those who feel they have assumed too large a share. Over the past five years that I have taught the course, my response has been to lower the weighting of the IAP from $40 \%$ to $30 \%$ of the final grade. Also, the $20 \%$ course participation component can be used to bring balance and fairness to the overall final grade if it is clear, after discussion with all group participants, that individual contributions were either too much or too little.

As I explain to the class in justifying a collective grade for the IAP, it is difficult to individualize any type of collaborative project and to know the degree to which participant conversations beyond the classroom have contributed to the final outcome. Most important, I tell the class that the kinds of negotiation and collaboration processes involved in the IAP are essential skills for any critical, transformative efforts they may attempt for themselves or on behalf of their EAP/ESL students. Building alliances amongst like-minded colleagues, identifying areas of consensus and compromise in support of curricular or administrative change, are all crucial aspects of effective leadership and advocacy in educational institutionsdpoints that are well argued in the final course readings by Elson and by Forhan and Scheraga. In short, the collaborative element of the IAP is both a challenge and strength in terms of overall course goals in fostering transformative EAP practitioners.

Another positive element I see is reflected in the diversity of formats or genres developed through the various ‘‘blueprints for action’’ as indicated in the examples above. Student-teachers become aware that there are many ways to work towards change and that being a transformative practitioner is not only oppositional but also constructive and engaged in specific problems and contingencies, in this way responding with hopeful, concrete practices that redress the shortcomings of critical pedagogies noted by Johnston above. To reiterate an earlier point, the diversity of critical interventions reflected in the different IAP’s also helps new practitioners self-define transformative roles with which they are personally comfortable and committed, and in ways that do not put their jobs at risk. Fostering transformative practitioners for EAP should not be an impositiondthe inculcation of a teacher-educator’s own prescribed notions of ‘‘legitimate’’ critical action and advocacy. The pedagogical ideal is one of dialogue, a genuine interaction in which both teachers and students in the LTE classroom open themselves up to new role possibilities and modes of intervention inspired in part by the experience of the IAP.

# 8. Conclusions

The IAP has familiar characteristics of a work-in-progress. Further ethnographic inquiry and action research on creating optimal conditions for critical consciencization (cf. Freire)dand their application to EAP and LTE curriculadwould seem to be a dimension worthy of closer examination based, in part, on some of the eco-semiotic and holistic principles drawn from Clarke and van Lier. As I noted at the beginning of this paper, promoting a new conceptual role for EAP teachers (e.g. transformative practitioner) may not involve the same systematic methods or pathways we would use to teach content knowledge or pedagogical content knowledge in LTE. The questions to explore, instead, are: what forms of classroom dialogue, what types of textual practices/activities and their sequencing over time foster the kinds of problem-posing and critical imagination exemplified by the quote from Benesch that introduced this paper?

The critical awareness potentially gained through the IAP process also requires the provision of critical EAP exemplars that bridge theory and practice through detailed case studies and actual lesson plans grounded in specific institutional settings and demands. New EAP teachers need to see how acts of agency emerge against and within the constraints and responsibilities imposed upon them in/by institutions of higher learning. More examples such as the readings from week 9 (Benesch, Thompson, Quinlisk, Morgan) would help towards this end. Equally important, we should not undervalue the ideological and discursive effects that published accounts of transformative pedagogies offer. New teachers may go into EAP settings where they might be discouraged by peers and colleagues from doing critical work often through the premise that such work lacks legitimacy and/or adequate research in the field. The presence and circulation of critical texts, particularly when published by reputable journals and academic presses, not only inspires transformative work, it also counters narrow and prejudicial claims made in support of the status quo.

In this latter respect, we can recognize that special journal issues such as this one on critical EAP transform our field in multiple, ongoing ways. I look forward to sharing its contents with my future LTE students.

# Appendix 1. Weekly themes and readings (LING 3600.3)

Week 1: Course Introduction and Overview

Week 2: The Learning Context: Local, National, and Global Factors Ashworth, M. (1985). ‘‘The community as beneficiary,’’ from Beyond methodology: Second language teaching and the community (pp. 3e31). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. Tollefson, J. W. (2000). Policy and ideology in the spread of English. In J.K. Hall & W.G. Eggington (Eds.), The sociopolitics of English language teaching (pp. 7e21). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. Cooke, D. (2001). Lives on hold: ESL in a restructured society: TESL Canada Journal, 18(2), 65e77. Duffy, A. (2004, Sept. 28). Fears of an underclass. Toronto Star Newspaper [on-line]. Week 3:The Politics of Classrooms, Teachers, and Learners, Part 1: Perspectives Pennycook, A. (2000). The social politics and the cultural politics of language classrooms. In J.K. Hall & W.G. Eggington (Eds.), The sociopolitics of English language teaching (pp. 89e103). Kumaravadivelu, B. (2003). ‘‘Conceptualizing teaching acts,’’ from Beyond methods: macro-strategies for language teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. Sauve´, V. (2000). ‘‘Understanding your context: Who are the learners?’’ from An introduction to teaching adult ESL. Toronto: Oxford University Press. Week 4: The Politics of Classrooms, Teachers, and Learners, Part 2: Interventions Auerbach, E. R. (2000). Creating participatory learning communities: Paradoxes and possibilities. In J. K. Hall & W. G. Eggington (Eds.), The sociopolitics of English language teaching (pp. 143e164). Cummins, J. (2001). ‘‘Identity and empowerment,’’ from Negotiating identities: Education for empowerment in a diverse society (2nd ed.). CABE. Morgan, B. (1997). Identity and intonation: Linking dynamic processes in an ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 431e450. Week 5:The Politics of Critical Teaching: Exploring Possibilities and Limitations Johnston, B. (2003). ‘‘Values and the politics of English Language Teaching,’’ from Values in English Language Teaching. Mahwah, NJ: LEA.

Clarke, M. A. (2003). ‘‘Empowerment: issues, constraints, and cautionary comments,’’ from A place to stand:   
Essays for educators in troubled times, vol. 1. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press. Week 6: Language Policies in Canada: Adult ESL/Citizenship and Culture in LINC Burnaby, B. (2002). Reflections on language policies in Canada: Three examples. In J. W. Tollefson (Ed.),   
Language policies in education (pp. 65e86). Lawrence Erlbaum. Pinet, R. (2006). The contestation of citizenship education at three stages of the LINC 4 & 5 curriculum guidelines:   
Production, reception, and implementation. TESL Canada Journal, 24 (1), 1e21. Haque, E., & Cray, E. (2007). Constraining teachers: Adult ESL settlement language training policy and imple  
mentation. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 634e642. Week 7: Teaching Canadian Culture in ESL Classrooms: Priorities and Challenges Courcheˆne, R. (1996). Teaching Canadian culture: Teacher preparation. TESL Canada Journal, 13 (2), 17e23. Sauve´, V. (1996). Working with the cultures of Canada in the ESL Classroom: A response to Robert Courcheˆne.   
TESL Canada Journal, 13 (2), 17e23. Thomson, R. I., & Derwing, T. M. (2004). Presenting Canadian values in LINC: The roles of textbooks and   
teachers. TESL Canada Journal, 21(2), 17e33. Week 8: Teaching & Diversity: Complexities of Race, Gender, Class, & Sexual Orientation Amin, N. (1999). Minority women teachers of ESL: Negotiating White English. In G. Braine (Ed.), Non-native   
educators in English language teaching (pp.93e104). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. James, C.E. (2002). Reading students/Reading teachers: Confronting the challenges of teaching in a diverse setting.   
Contact: 2001 Conference Proceedings Issue, 28 (3), p.1, pp.4e9. Vandrick, S. (1997). The role of hidden identities in the postsecondary ESL classroom.TESOL Quarterly, 31, 153e   
157. Week 9: Implications for Syllabus/Curriculum Design Benesch, S. (1998). Anorexia: A feminist EAP curriculum. In T. Smoke (Ed.), Adult ESL: Politics, pedagogy, and   
participation in classroom and community programs (pp.101e114). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. Thompson, C. (2002). Teaching critical thinking in EAP courses in Australia. TESOL Journal, 11(4), 15e20. Quinlisk, C. C. (2003). Media literacy in the ESL/EFL classroom: Reading images and cultural stories. TESOL   
Journal, 12(3), 35e40. Morgan, B. (1992/1993) Teaching the Gulf War in an ESL classroom. TESOL Journal, 2(2), 13e17. Week 10: Political/Ethical Issues in Assessment/Testing Norton, B., & Stewart, G. (1999). Accountability in language assessment of adult immigrants in Canada. Canadian   
Modern Language Review, 56, 223e244. Johnston, B. (2003). ‘‘The morality of testing and assessment,’’ from Values in English Language Teaching.   
Mahwah, NJ: LEA. Week 11: Education/ESL Under Pressure: Developing Leadership and Advocacy Skills Elson, N. (1997). Power, politicsdand persuasion: ESL in changing times. TESL Canada Journal, 14(2), 55e67. Forhan, L. E., & Scheraga, M. (2000). Becoming sociopolitically active. In J.K. Hall & W.G. Eggington (Eds.), The   
sociopolitics of English language teaching (pp. 195e221). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters. Week 12: Brief Oral Presentations of Group Projects/Course Review and Reflection

# References

Arnold, R., Burke, B., James, C., Martin, D., & Thomas, B. (1991). Educating for a change. Toronto: Between the Lines Press.   
Auerbach, E. R. (2000). Creating participatory learning communities: Paradoxes and possibilities. In J. K. Hall, & W. G. Eggington (Eds.), The sociopolitics of English language teaching (pp. 143e164). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Bazerman, C. (2004). Intertextuality: How texts rely on other texts. In C. Bazerman, & P. Prior (Eds.), What writing does and how it does it: An introduction to analyzing texts and textual practices (pp. 83e96). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates, Inc.   
Beatty, K. (2003). Teaching and researching computer-assisted language learning. London: Longman.   
Belcher, D. D. (2006). English for Specific Purposes: Teaching to perceived needs and imagined futures in worlds of work, study and everyday life. TESOL Quarterly, 40, 133e156.   
Benesch, S. (1998). Anorexia: A feminist EAP curriculum. In T. Smoke (Ed.), Adult ESL: Politics, pedagogy, and participation in classroom and community programs (pp. 101e114).   
Benesch, S. (2001). Critical English for academic purposes. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Biber, D., Johansson, S., Leech, G., Conrad, S., & Finegan, E. (1999). The Longman grammar of spoken and written English. London: Longman.   
Canagarajah, S. (2004). Multilingual writers and the struggle for voice in academic discourse. In A. Pavlenko, & A. Blackledge (Eds.), Negotiation of identities in multilingual contexts (pp. 266e289). Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Chapelle, C. A. (2005). Computer-assisted language learning. In E. Hinkel (Ed.), Handbook of research in second language teaching and learning (pp. 743e756). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Clarke, M. (2008). Language teacher identities: Co-constructing discourse and identity. Clevedon, UK: Multilingual Matters.   
Clarke, M. A. (2003). A place to stand: Essays for educators in troubled times, vol. 1. Ann Arbor, MI: University of Michigan Press.   
Coxhead, A. (2000). A new academic word list. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 213e238.   
Crookes, G., & Lehner, A. (n.d.) Reflections on an ESL critical pedagogy teacher education course. http://www2.hawaii.edu/\~crookes/crit_ped. html. Accessed 31.05.08.   
Cummins, J. (2000). Academic language learning, transformative pedagogy and information technology: Towards a critical balance. TESOL Quarterly, 34, 537e548.   
Cummins, J. (2001). Negotiating identities: Education for empowerment in a diverse society (2nd ed.). Ontario, CA: California Association of Bilingual Education.   
Dudley-Evans, T., & St. John, M. J. (1998). Developments in English for specific purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Duff, P. A., & Uchida, Y. (1997). The negotiation of teachers’ sociocultural identities and practices in postsecondary EFL classrooms. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 451e486.   
Giroux, H. (1988). Teachers as intellectuals: Towards a critical pedagogy of learning. Westport, CT: Bergin and Garvey.   
Guba, E. G., & Lincoln, Y. S. (Eds.). (1990). The paradigm dialog. Newbury Park, CA: Sage.   
Hawkins, M., & Norton, B. Critical language teacher education. In A. Burns, & J. Richards (Eds.), Handbook of teacher education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, in press.   
Johnston, B. (1999). The expatriate teacher as postmodern paladin. Research in the Teaching of English, 34, 255e280.   
Johnston, B. (2002). Values in English language teaching. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Kasper, L. F. (2000). The Internet and content-based college ESL instruction. In L. F. Kasper (Ed.), Content-based college ESL instruction (pp. 183e201). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Kress, G. (2003). Literacy in the new media age. London: Routledge.   
Kumaravadivelu, B. (2003). Beyond methods: Macro-strategies for language teaching. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press.   
van Lier, L. (2004). The ecology and semiotics of language learning: A sociocultural perspective. Dordrecht: Kluwer.   
Lin, A. M. Y. (2004). Introducing a critical pedagogical curriculum: a feminist reflexive account. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 271e290). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lin, A., Wang, W., Akamatsu, N., & Riazi, A. (2002). Appropriating English, expanding identities, and re-visioning the field: From TESOL to teaching English for glocalized communication (TEGCOM). Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 1, 295e316.   
Lynch, B. (1996). Language program evaluation: Theory and practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
McLaren, P. (1989). Life in schools: An introduction to critical pedagogy in the foundations of education. Toronto: OISE Press.   
Mendelsohn, D. J. (2001). Canadian language and culture: a course for nine academic credits. In J. Murphy, & P. Byrd (Eds.), Understanding the courses we teach: Local perspectives on English Language Teaching (pp. 309e327). Ann Arbor, MI: UMI.   
Modiano, M. (2004). Monoculturalization and language dissemination. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 3, 215e227.   
Morgan, B. (2004). Teacher identity as pedagogy: Towards a field-internal conceptualisation in bilingual and second language education. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 7, 172e188.   
Morgan, B. (2009). Revitalizing the essay in an English for Academic Purposes program: Critical engagement, multiliteracies, and the Internet. International Journal of Bilingual Education and Bilingualism, 12(3).   
Motha, S. (2006). Racializing ESOL teacher identities in U.S. K-12 public schools. TESOL Quarterly, 40, 495e518.   
Nelson, C. D. (2005). Transnational/Queer: narratives from the contact zone. Journal of Curriculum Theorizing, 21, 109e117.   
Pavlenko, A. (2003). ‘‘I never knew I was bilingual’’: Re-imagining teacher identities in TESOL. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 2, 251e268.   
Pawlikowska-Smith, G. (2000). Canadian language benchmarks 2000. Ottawa: Centre for Canadian Language Benchmarks.   
Pennycook, A. (1997). Vulgar pragmatism, critical pragmatism, and EAP. English for Specific Purposes, 16, 253e269.   
Pennycook, A. (2004). Critical moments in a TESOL praxicum. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 327e345). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Phillipson, R. (1992). Linguistic imperialism. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ramanathan, V. (2002). The politics of TESOL education: Writing, knowledge, critical pedagogy. New York: RoutledgeFalmer.   
Reagan, T. G., & Osborn, T. A. (2002). The foreign language educator in society: Toward a critical pedagogy. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Shor, I. (1992). Empowering education: Critical teaching for social change. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.   
Simon, R. I. (1992). Teaching against the grain: Texts for a pedagogy of possibility. Toronto: OISE Press.   
Skutnabb-Kangas, T. (2000). Linguistic genocide in education, or worldwide diversity and human rights? Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Starfield, S. (2004). ‘‘Why does this feel empowering’’? Thesis writing, concordancing, and the corporatizing university. In B. Norton, & K. Toohey (Eds.), Critical pedagogies and language learning (pp. 138e157). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Te´llez, K., & Waxman, H. C. (Eds.). (2006). Preparing quality educators for English language learners. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Thompson, C. (2002). Teaching critical thinking in EAP courses in Australia. TESOL Journal, 11, 15e20.   
Tsui, A. B. M. (2007). The complexities of identity formation: a narrative inquiry of an EFL teacher. TESOL Quarterly, 41, 657e680.   
Vandrick, S. (1997). The role of hidden identities in the postsecondary ESL classroom. TESOL Quarterly, 31, 153e157.   
Varghese, M., Morgan, B., Johnston, B., & Johnson, K. (2005). Theorizing language teacher identity: Three perspectives and beyond. Journal of Language, Identity, and Education, 4, 21e44.   
Wallerstein, N., & Auerbach, E. (2004). Problem-posing at work: Popular educator’s guide. Edmonton: Grass Roots Press.

Brian Morgan is an associate professor in the Department of English at Glendon College/York University and the Department of Languages, Literatures, and Linguistics at York University in Toronto. In addition to his work in critical EAP and language teacher education, his research interests include language and identity, critical literacies and pedagogies, and language policy and planning in ELT.