# One Government, Multiple Systems: Hong Kong Public Administration in Transition

Koehn, Peter H   
Public Organization Review; Mar 2001; 1, 1; ProQuest Central   
pg. 97

# One Government, Multiple Systems: Hong Kong Public Administration in Transition

PETER H. KOEHN Professor of Political Science, The University of Montana - Missoula, Missoula, Montana 59812

Key words: public-policy making, civil service, public administration, Hong Kong, transition, reversion

# Abstract

This study addresses the impact of a transformative political event--the reversion of sovereign authority-on the policy-making roles of public organizations and public administrators in Hong Kong. With the transter of sovereignty, the environment of public administration in Hong Kong became increasingly politicized. Civil servants now encounter pressures and conflicting demands from Bejing, from pro-democracy forces, from the Chief Executive, from members of the Legislative Council, and from the business community. Although the public bureaucracy retains its policy-making preeminence, its authority no longer is unquestioned and unchecked. The Central Government exerts hidden influence. Members of the Legislative Council are striving to become respected players in the policy-formulation process. The Chief Executive aims to introduce means of ensuring heightened bureaucratic responsiveness. The result has been a fragmented and volatile political-administrative environment. In the ongoing transition from colonial to reunited polity, the Special Administrative Region's one government is composed of competing systems of governance superimposed uncomfortably and inconclusively upon one another. The most probable governance outcome, at least until the possible popular election of a Chief Executive and Legislative Council on a competitive political-party basis in 2007, is for fragmentation, role conflict, and interest-accommodation to continue to characterize the policy-making process in the SAR.

# Transformative political change and public organizations

Transformative change in political systems typically exerts a profound impact on the functioning of public organizations. Students of comparative public administration possess access to informative studies that treat the administrative consequences of systemic change resulting from the military coup d'etat and transitions back to civilian rule (see, for instance, Koehn, 1990:59 82), from revolution (e.g., Farazmand, 1991), and from handovers by colonial rulers to newly independent governments (e.g., Baker, 1991:353-358). This study addresses the impact of a less common transformative political event: the reversion of sovereign authority to a larger, long-independent motherland, after a lengthy colonial interregnum. While the unique features and historical dynamics of Hong Kong's reunification with the China Mainland limit the direct applicability of its lessons for public organizations to Macau (which reverted to China in 1999) and, possibly and partially, to Taiwan (in the event of future reunification), its impact on the functioning of the public sector and its implications for governance are of considerable interest due to the city's exceptional influence and importance in global commerce. China's emerging superpower status, and the vast gulf between Hong Kong's Western-shaped administrative system, and the Mainland's prevail. ing indigenous Chinese bureaucratic practices (see, for instance, Dai, 1994; Ma, 1996)' are also significant points to be noted.

At the core of transformative political change is concern with policy making. In contrast to electoral and other kinds of non-transformative successions where the emphasis is on the people who occupy positions and the policies they advocate (see Carino, 1991:740), the primary focus of those who pursue political transformation is on altering the institutional basis for policy making. An institutional-rolechange focus provides a meaningful basis, therefore, for assessing the impact of Hong Kong's reversion to the China Mainland. In particular, this article is concerned with reversion's effect on the policy-making role of the civil service and with developments of relevance to institutional change that occurred during the year immediately following reunification.

On 1 July 1997, the British territory of Hong Kong reverted to China. The Basic Law, which functions as the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region's (SAR) constitution, guarantees that the former territory will retain its distinctive economic and political systems for fifty years. This combination of territorial integration and political/economic uniqueness has been widely referred to as "one country, two systems". This essay argues that, upon closer scrutiny focused on changes affecting policy-making roles, Hong Kong's public sector can be described as consisting of one government that encompasses multiple, overlapping, and competing systems of governance. While the direction thatthe on-going transition is headed is not yet entirely clear, some prospective outcomes are more likely than others.

The article commences by analyzing the changing, clashing, and emerging policy-making roles performed by civil servants, the chief executive and the Executive Council (Exco), civil-society actors and the Legislative Council (Legco), and Central Government (China Mainland) authorities. Then, it assesses the impact of reversion on the institutional basis of policy making in Hong Kong and explores the implications of transition developments for the future of governance in the Special Administrative Region.

# Civil servants: The legacy of a bureaucratic polity

The Letters Patent of 5 April 1843 established a governmental structure for Hong Kong, characterized by civil-service domination and its seclusion from "political and social forces which might threaten to undermine its autonomy," that formally resembled a "bureaucratic polity" (Lau, 1984:25). For most of Hong Kong's history, the official and unofficial members appointed by the Governor of Hong

Kong to the Legislative Council and the Executive Council showed no inclination to challenge bureaucratic "hegemony" (Lau, 1984:26-28). Accountable to the Queen of England rather than to an elected legislature or to the general public (Cheng and Lee, 1996:913), territorial administrators only possessed fiscal and budgetary autonomy after 1958 (Lau, 1984:29).

The colonial government structure concentrated political and administrative authority at the top of the bureaucratic system and emphasized classical-organization/management principles (Scott, 1984:14)-including centralized decision making (Lee, 1995:77; Miners, 1995:88; Lau, 1984:55) and obedience to the hierarchy among middle and lower levels (Lui, 1994:25). Today, the Chiet Secretary for Administration (originally, the Colonial Secretary) heads the Secre. tariat, the central coordinating and policy-making unit in the civil service (Mushkat. 1984:96), and supervises and coordinates 15 policy bureaus and more than 70 departments, offices, and agencies that report to bureau secretaries (Lee, 1998:639n; Miners, 1995:85 87). The Chief Secretary's Committee constitutes the paramount decision-making body within the bureaucracy (Cheung, 1995:40).

In addition to departments, the institutional legacy inherited by the SAR includes a variety of public and semi-public bodies (Miners, 1995:101-106, 111). These include statutory corporations (e.g., the Housing Authority, the Hospital Authority, the universities, the Mass Transit Railway (MTR) Corporation, the Airport Authority), public companies where the government is a shareholder (e.g., the Building and Loan Agency, the Cross-Harbour Tunnel Company, Hong Kong Air Cargo Terminals Ltd.), private institutions subsidized in whole or in part by the Government (e.g., Hong Kong Shippers' Council, Hong Kong Management Association, Road Safety Association), and public utilities granted a franchise by the Government in exchange for restrictions on fares and fees (e.g., the Electricity Supply Commission, bus companies).

# Senior civil service

In Hong Kong, a small number of administrators and professionals "have direct influence on the policy process and determine significant policy outcomes" (Burns and Scott, 1984:27; Cheng and Lee, 1996:920). The vast majority of these influential officials are administrative officers serving in the Secretariat or in top departmental positions (Mushkat, 1984:96; Miners, 1995:91). Directorate-grade officers, roughly 0.5 per cent of the 190,000-person civil service in 1993, are the most senior officials. This group, which includes professional officers since 1982 (Miners, 1995:91), holds posts that range from chief or principal officer to secretary in the Secretariat's policy bureaus.

In accordance with British civil-service tradition, administrative-class officers in Hong Kong are formally and informally expected to occupy strategic positions and to perform central decision-making roles in the formulation of policy and in the coordination of programs (Mushkat, 1984:96-97). As they gain in seniority and move up in the subgrade ranks, administrative-class officers become increasingly occupied with strategic planning and political matters (Mushkat, 1984:97-98).

Administrative-class officers, whether Chinese or European, tend to adhere to a common organizational culture that is cultivated and reinforced by careful screening, internal socialization, and performance assessment. Selection criteria include "political acumen," "analytical power," "judgment," and "leadership"-qualities that are likely to identify "persons with the potential to be all-rounded policymakers and 'quasi-politicians' (Lee, 1997:8). The selection process is extremely competitive. The rate of successful application in 1997 was under 0.3 per cent (Lee, 1997:11). Performance appraisals are designed to reward generalist managers "who can effectively make public policies yet loyally abide by the institutional values and principles" (Lee, 1997:10). Taken together, these factors help to ensure that administrative-class officers possess similar values and outlooks, a strong sense of solidarity and mutual respect, and "a high degree of mutual trust such that each of the members may exercise independent' political judgment and decision with the minimal supervision of a hierarchy" (Lee, 1997:8).2

# Role of policy secretaries and department heads

Following the 1974 review of Hong Kong's machinery of government conducted by McKinsey & Company, which recommended relieving the work overload confronting the Chief Secretary and the Financial Secretary, the colonial authorities established a new layer of high-level policy secretaries within the Secretariat (Cheung, 1995:41; Miners, 1995:88). Policy secretaries are authorized to formuIate, plan, and control programs for specific groups of departments and offices; they also are responsible for monitoring progress in program implementation and are answerable for results. They play a decisive administrative role because department heads must refer "all suggestions for changing policy ..., and requests to recruit more senior staff, buy new equipment, put up new buildings, or spend money in a different way from that authorized in the annual departmental estimates..." to the appropriate branch (retitled "bureau" in 1997) of the Government Secretariat.3 On the basis of assessments of available resources and government priorities, policy secretaries either decide such matters themselves, take issues to the Chief Secretary or the Chief Secretary's Committee for decision, or "draft a paper for consideration by the Executive Council or the Finance Committee of the Legislative Council' (Miners, 1995:88 89). In addition, standing policy groups established along program lines within the Chief Secretary's Committee (involving both bureau secretaries and department heads) and working groups composed of secretariat and department personnel are used for purposes of policy formulation, program planning and coordination, mediating conflicts, and forging compromises (Miners, 1995:90).

In the 1980s, reform measures expanded the authority of department heads to redirect funds within their overall budgetary allocation (Cheung, 1995:44). By the 1990s, however, policy secretaries sought greater flexibility in managing operating budgets. They further objected to the prevailing highly centralized resourceallocation practice under which Finance Branch-determined baseline expenditures constituted the bulk of the annual estimates and policy secretaries only could influence the 1-2 per cent devoted to "new spending" (Tsang, 1995:4-7, 14; also see Lee, 1998:635; Cheung, 1996:42). In the annual budget-formulation process, "the Star Chamber (which is chaired by the Chief Secretary, and consists of the Financial Secretary, the Secretary for the Civil Service, and the Secretary for the Treasury) decides on the strategic allocation of resources and the indicative spending upon receiving the Baseline Reviews and presentations of policy secretaries" (Lee, 1998:639n).

The Basic Law stipulates that principal officials must be Chinese permanent residents of the Special Administrative Region who do not possess right of abode in a foreign country. By the time of reunification, all expatriate secretaries and many directorate-level officers had been replaced by local Chinese personnel (Lee, 1997:5-6). However, through the horizontal transfer of expatriates into positions previously held by indigenes, return to the briefly avoided practice of deputizing expatriates to act for principal officers in their absence, and changes in the official line that emphasized the importance of retaining the expertise possessed by expatriate civil servants, the pace of localization slowed following the handover (see South China Morning Post, 24 August I997, p. 14).4

In terms of the people who staff Hong Kong's civil service, there is surprising continuity in the faces found in top-level pre- and post-handover bureaucratic posts. The SAR's first Chief Executive, Tung Chee-hwa, retained nearly all of the top 23 officials in the territorial government. The only top-level officials who owed their initial selection to Mr Tung were Secretary for Justice Elsie Leung Oi-sie, Commissioner of the Independent Commission Against Corruption (ICAC) Lily Yam Kwan Pui-ying, and Head of the Chief Executive's Central Policy Unit Gordon Siu Kwing-chue (Yeung, 1998b:12; Cheung, 1998:4). The Central Government, convinced of the importance of continuity at the top of the civil service, endorsed all of his principal-officer nominations. In the short run, preserving the team of policy secretaries "groomed in the prehandover administration' delivered a message of stability that received public and international acclaim (Yeung, 1998a:6; 1998b:12; Hong Kong Trader, April 1997, p. 8). However, the decision to appoint and retain individuals first entrusted with authority by the British ensured that the Chief Executive's relations with senior civil servants would involve conflict, tension, and frustration. Beneath the surface smoothness, "sharp differences in backgrounds, mind sets and work styles became apparent..." (Yeung, 1998b:12). As Fanny Wong (1997:21) reported barely three months into the transition, "the shadow of the present senior civil service team as a product of the colonial regime has probably loomed large in Mr Tung's mind".

# 2.3. Senior official profiles

Traditionally, the three paramount policy posts in the Hong Kong civil service have been the positions of Chief Secretary for Administration, Financial Secretary, and Secretary for Justice (formerly attorney-general). Although many analysts expected that the transition would include personnel changes in all three senior positions, turnover only occurred in the case of the Secretary for Justice where the pre-handover attorney-general, Jeremy Matthews, could not be re-appointed because he did not meet the Hong Kong nationality requirement of the Basic Law (Yeung, 1998b:12). To the extent that people matter in administration, the occupants of these three top positions, Anson Chan Fang On-sang, Donald Tsang Yam-kuen, and Elsie Leung Oi-sie, merit special consideration. This section briefly explores their diverse commitments and roles during the period of fundamental political change that has occurred in Hong Kong.

Anson Chan. The prominent and popular head of the SAR's civil service, Anson Chan, served British rule for 35 years prior to 1 July 1997 (Chan, 1997:32). Ms Chan, the first locally recruited administrative officer and first woman to be appointed Chief Secretary in Hong Kong, gained administrative experience in a wide range of key government units-including 'the Urban Services Department, the Agriculture and Fisheries Department, Finance Branch, the New Territories Administration, and the Social Services Branch. She then moved on to the Social Welfare Department, where she became Director and then became Secretary for Economic Services" (Miners, 1995:91).

Ms Chan has been a strong advocate of the rule of law and of the civil servants who function as the "backbone" of Hong Kong's government.5 In the posttransition period, she has successfully navigated a delicate path that has incorporated official expressions of loyalty to the Chief Executive, respect for the Central Government and the Basic Law, commitment to resisting unlawful external interference in Hong Kong affairs, and, recently, support for democratic electoral reforms. In January 1998, for instance, Ms Chan assured Vice-Premier Qian Qichen of the PRC that the entire civil service was behind Tung Chee-hwa and that they "will give their full support and put a full effort behind any decision made by the SAR Government under Mr Tung's leadership" (South China Morning Post, 7 January 1998, p. 4). She also reported working closely and smoothly with Ma Yuzhen, the Foreign Ministry Commissioner assigned by the Mainland to the SAR (Hon, 1997:6). Roughly one year following the transfer, Ms Chan opined that "the real transition is about identity not sovereignty" (Yeung, 1998e:4). One intent of this remark was to move beyond the perception that she was "pro-British." "We are now in one big family," she continued, where "everyone has the same identity... and should work together" (Yeung, 1998a:6).

While she seeks to shed the pro-British label, Anson Chan also has publicly resisted egregious instances of attempted Mainland interference in Hong Kong affairs. In March 1998, for instance, the Chief Secretary for Administration warned that the attack made by influential CCP member Xu Simin on Radio Television Hong Kong's (RTHK) criticism of the SAR Government and Chief Executive Tung at the Chinese People's Consultative Conference meetings in Beijing was "particularly regrettable" because it could be interpreted to invite such interference. Her comments contrasted sharply with the Chief Executive's reaction. Mr Tung did not denounce Mr Xu's attack and noted that "while freedom of speech is important, it is also important for government policies to be positively presented' (Choy and Yeung, 1998:1). On the same grounds, Ms Chan quickly rebutted a public warning issued in April 2o0o by Wang Fengchao, a deputy director in the Central Government's liaison office in the SAR, that the Hong Kong media should not spread "splittist" views on Taiwan (South China Morning Post, 13 & 14 April 2000). Anson Chan also has withdrawn support for the limited-suffrage approach favored by the Central Government in SAR Legislative Council elections. In July 2o00, she criticized the existing functional-constituency system (see note 14) on the basis that it divides Hong Kong society into first- and second-class citizens and called for public discussion on how to bring about universal suffrage (South China Morning Post, 20 & 21 July 2000).

Anson Chan's post-reversion record of administrative performance as Chief Secretary is mixed. For instance, it was only after Tung Chee-hwa specifically put her in charge of a high-powered interdepartmental working group that the civil service managed to deal with the 1998 bird-flu crisis in a coordinated manner that restored public confidence (Lau, 1998a:19).6 On the other hand, in its investigation of the 1998 Hong Kong new international airport fiasco, the Legislative Council found Ms Chan, as Chair of the Airport Development Steering Committee (ADSCOM), personally responsible for failing to lead ADSCOM in monitoring the Airport Authority. The independent government-established Commission of Inquiry on the New Airport, however, concluded that it would be unfair to hold any ADSCOM members responsible for the fiasco. As a result of the contradictory and ambiguous conclusions reported by the three investigative bodies involved, "no major government officials shouldered the ultimate responsibility' (Lee, 2000:60-- 69). Ms Chan also consistently has defended subordinates even in the face of administrative errors and chaotic crisis management. After a series of blunders in dealing with the bird-flu crisis, for instance, Ms Chan maintained that there was "absolutely no need' for any public official to apologize or resign (Ho, 1998:19; Richburg, 1998:4). In the wake of an overwhelming Legco vote of no confidence in Director of Housing Tony Miller and Housing Authority Chairwoman Rosanna Wong Yick-ming following a series of housing scandals, the Chief Secretary for Administration strongly defended senior civil servants against "politicization" efforts (South China Morning Post, 29 & 30 June 2000).

Throughout most of the post-reversion period, public approval of Anson Chan's performance in office has greatly exceeded that recorded for Chief Executive Tung Chee-hwa. Her ratings even improve when public approval of other officials declines (see South China Morning Post, 6 March 2o00). Her popularity undoubt. edly influenced her initial decision to continue as Chief Secretary after she reached the official retirement age of 60 in March 2000 (see Yeung, 1998a:6; South China Morning Post, 13 March 2000).

Donald Tsang. Donald Tsang, like Ms Chan, is a top civil servant whose views were expected to diverge from those of the Chief Executive on certain issues (Hong Kong Trader, April 1997, p. 8). "A true leader must have faith in himself ..., he said, in accepting a leader-of-the year award in 1998 (Yeung, 1998d:17).

Mr Tsang has a reputation as a no-nonsense Financial Secretary and as a fiscal conservative. Nevertheless, in the midst of the Asian financial crisis, an increase in Hong Kong's jobless population, and pressures from many directions, he responded to reporters' questions about the upcoming budget by "zigzagging his mouth with his fingers and pulling his cheeks with his fingers to make a smiling face... for a simple message: 'I can't talk now. Wait for February 18'" (Yeung, 1998d:17). He also managed to develop a surplus budget that year that could still be seen as prudent while it reduced taxes and increased government spending (Lau, 1998b:19). As Financial Secretary, Donald Tsang has consistently adhered to fundamental principles that are dear to Chief Executive Tung, the Central Government, and their business allies: low tax rate, surplus budget, and limited public spending (Lee, 1998:632-633, 637).

Mr Tsang's positions on public-sector reform, initially set forth while he served as Director of Administration in 1991, complement his fiscal policies. In 1991, he noted that the aim of Hong Kong's reform is to "achieve more results with less spendings" so that the public receives better service while all civil servants realize greater job satisfaction. Thus, policy secretaries and department heads should agree to provide new or improved services without insisting "I can only do it if the Finance Branch gives me more money." The incentive for top managers to introduce new programs while carefully controlling finances is the "need to feel being loved and not cursed' (Tsang, 1995:11, 13). In Hong Kong, Eliza Lee suggests (1998:636 637), the underlying objective of administrative-reform devices such as value-for-money and efficiency initiatives is to deflect pressures for democratic political reform and greater political accountability by "controlling the size of the public sector while satisfying the public demand for better and more public services" (also see Cheung, 1996:41).

As Financial Secretary, Mr Tsang has faced accusations of "enabling wealthy cronies to profit from government stock purchases" and "failing vigorously to implement a promised programme of employment stimulation through public works spending..." (Baum, 2000:459). While his approval rating has fluctuated in the post-handover period (see DeGolyer, 1999a:100; for Mr Tsang's selfreported career highs and lows, see South China Morning Post, 8 March 2000), one survey found Mr Tsang to be the most popular senior government official in mid-2000 (South China Morning Post, 2 July 2000).

Elsie Leung. Elsie Leung, a past delegate to the National People's Congress in Beijing and the one Tung-selected member at the top of the civil service, has endured considerable heat for making decisions that are widely perceived to promote or protect the interests of the Chief Executive and the Central Government. Her performance ratings have consistently been considerably more negative than the Financial Secretary's, however (see DeGolyer, 1999a:100).

Ms Leung's dual role as legal advisor to the SAR Government and prosecuting authority has made it difficult to "divorce prosecution decisions from the politics of government-and even harder to dispel public impression that prosecution decisions are so influenced" (Yash Ghai, quoted in South China Morning Post, 26 March 1998, p. 9). Early on, Ms Leung encountered criticism for her decision not to prosecute the Xinhua news agency when it missed a deadline required by the Personal Data (Privacy) Ordinance and, more importantly, for opting not to prosecute the Chair of the Sing Tao Group (where Tung Chee-hwa previously had served as a non-executive director) in an alleged fraud case involving senior executives of the Hong Kong Standard who had been arrested by the ICAC (South China Morning Post, 26 March 1998, p. 9; 22 May 1998, p. 6). She also crafted an official rebuttal of charges that the Tung administration's initial style of administrative decision making was characterized by "repeated occurrences of token consultation, and short or no prior publication for important policies..." (Ng, 1997:19; Leung, 1997:21). In spite of her low public approval ratings and the continuous "heat" she has experienced, the 61-year-old Ms Leung opted to remain as Secretary for Justice beyond the official retirement age (South China Morning Post, 17 May 2000).

# Reputation for efficiency in service delivery

Hong Kong's administrative culture places special emphasis on the values of merit, efficiency, and integrity. In the Hong Kong context, merit usually requires "competitive excellence". Candidates qualified for appointment and promotion compete with one another "to demonstrate their relative excellence". In the end, only the most outstanding competitors are rewarded (Lui, 1984:62). Professionalism, qualifications secured from high-status institutions, and training are highly valued in assessing merit (Lieberthal, 1997:31; Lui, 1994:28).8

The value of efficient performance is "deeply embedded in the civil servants' collective mentality" (Lui, 1994:18). Efficient performance involves tight fiscal management and the "ability to resolve immediate societal problems and to avoid foreseeable crises in a prompt manner and without incurring too many charges on the public purse" (Lui, 1994:18). The British placed particular emphasis on efficient performance in an effort to "justify and legitimize" colonial rule by unaccountable bureaucrats (Lui, 1994:18, 25; Lee, 1995:77; Tsang, 1995:68).9 Efficiency also has provided a binding and motivating common value for civil servants as well as a basis for justifying the prevailing hierarchy of authority and ingrained administrative and management practices (Lui, 1994:26-27; Lee, 1995:77).

The emphasis placed on efficiency by the colonial regime produced results in terms of public perceptions. For most of the colonial period, the Hong Kong civil service enjoyed a reputation for prudent fiscal management and efficient performance in service delivery (Cheung, 1995:59; 1996:33; Lui, 1994:26; Lau, 1984:25; Lee, 1998:631). However, as Lau Siu-kai points out (1984:49), "while the bureaucracy was relatively efficient in the routine administrative duties and in maintaining law and order, it was deficient both in promoting development and in adapting to changing circumstances." Later, as society became more politicized and a multitude of unresolved social problems arose, the Government's performance failed to satisfy public demands and expectations (Lau, 1997:38, 47, 54n).10'

# Public-sector reform: value for money

Recent public-sector reform in Hong Kong has focused on financial-management efforts designed to ensure "value for money". The value-for-money principle (i.e., doing better and more with less) has been proposed as the only means of assuming new commitments "essential to Hong Kong" with minimal demands for additional funding (Tsang, 1995:13; Cheung, 1995:42-43; Lui, 1994:18). Resource-management reform received increasing emphasis as Hong Kong experienced mounting fiscal stress.

In 1992, the Government formed a high-level Public Sector Reform Policy Group, whose members included three business executives, and set up a provisional Efficiency Unit under the Chief Secretary's office. This unit, charged with providing technical support for branch and departmental initiatives, became permanent in 1993 (Cheung, 1995:40; Tsang, 1995:12) and launched the official Serving the Community program in 1995 (Lee, 1998:634). The operational emphasis of the Hong Kong reform is at the departmental level-where, in return for increased autonomy and internal accountability in financial-allocation decisions, resource managers are expected to reevaluate policies and to identify "service areas which could possibly be provided with better quality within the same level of spending" (Lee, 1995:75; Lui, 1994:28) as well as savings among existing programs that can be redeployed efficiently (Cheung, 1995:4 5). Attempts to inject private-sector resource-management practices (what Eliza Lee, 1998:635-- 636, refers to as "new managerialism devices") and to engage in public entrepreneurship also have been encouraged (Lui, 1994:18; Cheung, 1995:52; 1996:31).11

In addition, pressures to "hive off' public functions resurfaced as part of the public-sector-reform movement. The 1974 McKinsey review first proposed hiving off some government operations, such as water supply, in ways that would approach private-sector delivery systems (e.g., contracting out, public corporatization, privatization). The Public Sector Reform report reinforced the principle of hiving off (Cheung, 1995:44, 50-52; Lee, 1995:75). In July 2000, however, over 10,000 public servants demonstrated in protest against the administration's

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

"unreasonable" civil-service-reform proposals, particularly its privatization plans, and demanded that they be reassured of their "importance to society" (see South China Morning Post, 5, 8, & 10 July 2000).

Some critics view the main thrusts of the Government's overall public-sectorreform exercise as part of a deliberate strategy that attempts to deal with political overloading by shedding social responsibility and by "leaving the under-privileged to the mercy of the market" (Cheung, 1995:55, 59 60; 1996:32). Others rue the missed opportunity to pursue public accountability as opposed to internal managerial accountability (Lee, 1995:77).

# The legislative council: A policy-shaping body?

Prior to 1985, civil servants dominated the political process. The Legislative Council acted in submissive fashion and engaged in minimal monitoring of the executive branch (Cheng and Lee, 1996:917, 925). Civil servants controlled both policy-making and policy-implementing functions virtually unchecked by competing sources of political power (Lau, 1984:38). Although top administrators continue to be expected to perform both political-direction and policy-management roles (Miners, 1995:91-92), they have been increasingly challenged by contending political forces and civil-society actors since the introduction of partially direct election to the Legislative Council.

# Civil-society co-optation

In contrast to the generally high marks it received on efficiency, the colonial government of Hong Kong did not generate favorable impressions and assessments in terms of its responsiveness to the interests of the majority of the Chinese populace of the Territory (Lau, 1984:122). Lau Siu-kai (1984:122-129) has shown that the roots of the responsiveness gap can be traced to the weakly integrated socio-political system.

Beginning in 1968, the colonial regime professed interest in becoming more responsive to the needs and wishes of the inhabitants of Hong Kong (Tsang, 1997:73). In an effort to "disguise the stark reality of the undemocratic administrative state in Hong Kong," the British established over 500 consultative and advisory committees and boards at all levels of government and co-opted nearly 6,000 residents to serve on them (Miners, 1995:110-111, 106). These bodies, whose members the Governor formally appointed, primarily absorbed Chinese business elites into the political-administrative circle (King, 1981:135; Miners, 1995:108). In addition, the British pursued decentralization through the introduction of an Urban Council at the second tier of government (joined in the 1980s by a Regional Council) and a third tier of district boards (all with elected members) as well as by experimenting with a City District Officer scheme following the 1967 riots (see King, 1981:137-146; A. Wong, 1997:16).

These reforms, as well as transition-related measures introduced later, generally failed to bring about greater bureaucratic responsiveness to mass interests. Few voters participated in elections to the Urban Council, a body widely perceived to lack power (King, 1981:132-133).12 The committee system has been prone to overlapping membership, conflicts of interest, infrequent meetings, and control by official (government) members and committee staff (Miners, 1995:108-109, 113n). The Colonial Government "adroitly excluded" local residents who held critical views of prevailing policies and practices from committee membership (Lau, 1984:129). As a result of the lack of a mass power base and submissiveness and timidity in pressing serious social issues on the part of the co-opted Chinese elite, "vigorous articulation of interests in behalf of the common people and against the interests of the government was rare..." (Lau, 1984:129). In practice, moreover, the British showed little willingness to engage in substantial decentralization "of resources and decision-making power to the grass-roots levels" out of concern for efficiency, administrative integrity, and the maintenance of bureaucratic dominance (Lau, 1984:145; Lui, 1994:51; South China Morning Post, 18 October 1998, p. 17).

The post-transfer Government used the failure of coordination in effectuating public-hygiene measures during the avian-flu crisis as an excuse for recentralizing power into bureaucratic hands through the abolition of the Urban and Regional Councils and the assumption of their powers by departments (see South China Morning Post, 2 June 1998, pp. 1, 6, 17; 13 June 1998, p. 18; Gittings, 1998:16; Pepper, 2000:435). Finally, the "formal apparatus of consultations on policy proposals" introduced in the 1990s by Chief Secretary Anson Chan fell into "disarray in the last six months up to handover and during the interim year as consultation periods shrank... [and] became pro forma exercises instead of... genuine effrts to gather alternative ideas" (DeGolyer, 1999a:83).13"

# Impact of reversion

For public organizations in Hong Kong, perhaps the most fundamental aspect of the transition process is what it did not do. It did not institute a powerful elected legislative body or a strong political party system that competed effectively in the policy-formulation process. Indeed, "China made explicit its objection to any attempt by Britain to turn the legislature into a centre of power and subordinate all other political and administrative institutions to it" (S.K. Lau, 1997:35; 1998:19; also see Lee, 1995:79 80; Lau and Kuan, 2000: 706-707). While most senior civil servants indicated that they should become accountable to Legco (Cheng and Lee, 1996:922; also see Lee, 1995:80), they defined accountability in terms of explaining, consulting, and seeking advice (Lam and Lee, 1994:48). They continued to believe that they should hold decision-making power and rejected the proposition that the civil service of Hong Kong should be controlled by politicians and/or the Legislative Council (Lam and Lee, 1994:47-48). Indeed, according to Michael DeGolyer (1999a:82- 83, 95), civil servants' colonial-era guardian mentality and attitude of superiority "reached renewed heights in the first months following the handover".

On the other hand, the transfer of sovereignty introduced subtle, but important changes in the environment of public administration in Hong Kong. For instance, with the executive branch no longer assured majority support in the Legislative Council, senior civil servants, beginning in the pre-handover period and continuing after the reversion, had to shoulder additional responsibilities for publicly explaining and selling proposed policies, lobbying for legislative enactments, and drafting replies to questions (Cheng and Lee, 1996:913-914, 922; Lee, 1995:78; C.K. Lau, 1998a:19; Lee, 1998:635). In short, bureaucratic responses to public problems occur in a more transparent environment (also see the analysis presented by Anthony Cheung in Lau, 1998a:19).

Under the "executive-led" system called for by the Basic Law, the executive branch of the Hong Kong Government controls the legislative initiative. However, executive-proposed policies cannot become law unless they are passed and funded by the Legislative Council (see S.K. Lau, 1998a:19; DeGolyer, 1999a:105-106; Cheng and Lee, 1996:914). The May 1998 Legco elections, conducted predominantly along functional-constituency lines,'4 only included 20 popularly elected seats out of the total of 60 members. As a result, Hong Kong's most widely supported political party, the Democratic Party, holds a minority of seats in the legislative body. The nature of the electoral system (see Baum, 2000:446 448, 458) and party fragmentation (see Lau and Kuan, 2000:707-708), along with the presence of independent members, weakens Legco's ability to block executive-advanced policies. At the same time, however, this disunity means that the executive branch, headed by a Chief Executive who possesses no party afiliation and a narrow base of political support, cannot count on legislative endorsement of its policy goals (S.K. Lau, 1998a:19; Cheng and Lee, 1996:925). In practice, therefore, Legco has become the institutional focus of opposition to the administration's social and economic policies (see Baum, 2000:455-462; South China Morning Post, 1 July 1998, p. 4; Ching, 1999:326; Lau, 1998b:19; DeGolyer, 1999a:96; Goodstadt, 2000:739). The status of Hong Kong's economy, including "the ever-widening gap between the rich and the poor, and the impoverishment of the middle classes" (S.K. Lau, 1998a:19), constitutes the most salient issue for mobilizing opposition to the policies favored by the Chief Executive, Hong Kong business tycoons, and the civil service (see DeGolyer, 1999a: 97, 102, 104; also see Cheng and Lee, 1996:925; Cheng, 1998:14; Pepper, 2000:437).

Elected Legco representatives are also expected to protect the interests of their geographical or occupational-group constituents and to monitor executive-branch actions closely. These new Legislative Council roles, particularly member insis

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

tence on a "more effective monitoring role in the policy process" (Lee, 1995:78- 79; DeGolyer, 1999a:76), have produced clashes with civil servants (S.K. Lau. 1998a:19)-who continue to occupy key positions in policy formulation and implementation and tend not to hold members of the elected body in high esteem (see South China Morning Post, 10 January 1998, p. 17; Cheng and Lee, 1996:925 931; Cheung, 1995:62; Baum, 2000:459). DeGolyer (1999a:74. 84) maintains that by serving in an effective watchdog capacity, with an "authoritative mandate... to compel attention and response," Legco members can help the Government of Hong Kong avoid making disastrous policy decisions brought about by executive-branch isolation and internal administrative conflicts.15

# The chief executive and Exco: Governance by business tycoons?

Following the 1997 transfer of power, the functions and powers of the Chief Executive remained similar in most respects to those exercised by the Governor (Miners, 1995:81). In addition, provisions regarding the advisory Executive Council remained unchanged under the Basic Law. The Chief Executive continues to draw Exco members from the principal officers, Legco, and other public figures16 without clearance by the Central Government. Once the Executive Council is constituted, the Chief Executive "is required to consult the Council before making any important policy decisions, but he is not obliged to accept the opinion of the majority" (Miners, 1995:82).

The method of designating the Chief Executive changed from colonial appointment to selection, in 1997, by a Preparatory Committee appointed by the National People's Congress of the People's Republic of China with Mainlanders constituting one-third of the members and, in 2002, by an appointed 800-member Election Committee (Ching, 1999:314, 319; Miners, 1995:81).17 Hong Kong's first Chief Executive, Tung Chee-hwa, possesses a background in business (shipping magnate) and a network of contacts and information sources that extends far beyond the civil service (F. Wong, 1997:21). Tung, in turn, hand picked an Executive Council composed mainly of wealthy pro-China businessmen who "were on the Selection Committee that chose him for the job" (F. Wong, 1997:21; International Herald Tribune, 25-26 January 1997, p. 5). The Chinese Communist Party leadership's predilection for governance of the SAR by business tycoons is one of the ironic outcomes of reversion (see the analysis in Goodstadt, 2000:721-741).

Not surprisingly, reports surfaced during the first post-return year of conflicts and confrontations over views on policy and civil-service procedure between the Chief Executive and his valued Exco loyalists on one hand and the inherited team of policy secretaries and Chief Secretary on the other hand (Yeung, 1998b:12; F. Wong, 1997:21; Fung, 1997:4; DeGolyer, 1999a:79n). Friction rather than unity also exists in relations between other senior civil servants and the Chief Execu. tive/Exco. In spite of the January 1998 assurance by the Chief Secretary for

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Administration, Anson Chan, that 'civil servants will give their full support and put a full effort behind any decision made by the SAR Government under Mr Tung's leadership' (cited in South China Morning Post, 7 January 1998, p. 4; also see South China Morning Post, 10 January 1998, p. 17), the Chief Executive continued to show dissatisfaction with the responsiveness to his policy directions demonstrated by the bureaucracy and the principal officers he inherited from the colonial regime (see, for instance, Yeung, 1998b:12; F. Wong, 1997:21; DeGolyer, 1999a:97). Moreover, as Lau Siu-kai noted at the time of Ms Chan's remarks, 'she's highlighted the support to Mr Tung, but not to the Exco. The issue of the relationship between the policy secretaries and the Exco has been avoided' (cited in South China Morning Post, 10 January 1998, p. 17).

With support from Beijing, Tung Chee-hwa is inclined to replace bureaucratic dominance with a strong chief-executive-led system of government (also see DeGolyer, 1999a:76). Toward this end, most of the loyal supporters he appointed to Exco serve as his personal advisers; some are "assignedto chairinfluential policyrelated advisory committees or given policy 'portfolios'" (S.K. Lau, 1998b:25; also see Lee, 1997:11). He also set up a Central Policy Unit, to serve as the Chief Executive's "think tank", with a staff of 25 and an annual budget of $H K \$ 11$ million (Cheung, 1998:4). However, Exco members have not been active in formulating policy proposals and "have no direct role in supervising an area of government, i.e., a department now headed by civil servants..." (DeGolyer, 1999a:197).

Although Chief Executive Tung officially continues to adhere to a "no minister' line (South China Morning Post, 2 July 2o0o; South China Morning Post, 3 March 1998, p. 19 and 5 April 1998, p. 2), some of his closest aids, such as Sze-yuen Chung, envision a ministerial system "as an inevitable longterm development of the executive-led system" (Yeung, 1998b:12). Lau Siu-kai has publicly pointed out that Hong Kong's principal officers already are "veritable ministers" under the Basic Law. Since the Chief Executive has the power to dismiss civil servants from such posts and replace them with outsiders not granted civil-service status, Professor Lau argues, Mr Tung could introduce an effective ministerial system merely by exercising this power (S.K. Lau, 1998b:25). The Secretary for Civil Service, Lam Woonkwong, quickly countered that the principal officers originally appointed by the Chief Executive (overwhelmingly civil servants) would serve throughout Mr Tung's term of office or until reaching retirement age and warned against making senior postings political appointments (Hon, 1998a:2).18 In light of the low levels of public support accorded to himself and to Justice Secretary Elsie Leung and the sensitivities of many civil servants, it is not surprising that Mr Tung decided not to replace additional principal officers with outside political appointees (DeGolyer, 1999a:98- 99).

Tung Chee-hwa, has been well-received by foreign governments and business leaders and has garnered strong backing from the Central Government (see Yeung, 1998a:19). Fundamentally, however, the Chief Executive's policy-making role is constrained by the lack of a local political-party base. The institutional

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

changes brought about by transition negotiations failed to provide the SAR Chief Executive with the basic ability to forge a governing coalition reinforced by popular Iocal support (Yeung, 1998c:19). Nevertheless, the powerful business tycoons who are close to Tung have not been willing to support "democratic demands for stronger rather than weaker institutions of representative government..." (Pepper, 2000:437).

# Relations with China mainland authorities

Under the Basic Law, Hong Kong retains its independent financial system. This means, among other things, that locally collected revenues are not turned over to the Central Government and that central authorities are not authorized to levy taxes in the SAR (see China Daily, 10 April 1997, p. 4). Both the Joint Declaration of 1984 and the 1990 Basic Law explicitly provided that Hong Kong civil servants would retain their employment and that the civil-service system would be preserved after 1 July 1997 (Lui, 1994:47). Furthermore, persons from the Chinese Mainland continue to be banned from employment in the SAR Government and Hong Kong residents remain ineligible for recruitment into Mainland posts (Choy, 1998:6).

Although China assumed control over Hong Kong's foreign and defense affairs on 1 July 1997, the SAR Government retains extensive autonomous power in conducting external affairs and in maintaining its international stature by concluding and respecting economic and other agreements with foreign states and multilateral bodies. In short, Hong Kong remains an effective nonstate actor on the international scene (Davis, 1997:5, 8). On occasion, former British civil servants have represented the SAR at international meetings and joined Central Government delegations at international conferences (Yeung, 1997:2).

# Changing locus of political direction and identification

While China and Britain were locked in conflict over numerous transition issues (see, for instance, Lee, 1995:80-83), Hong Kong civil servants were "squeezed between their current and future masters" in an increasingly politicized environment (S.K. Lau, 1997:46-47).19 During this period, a number of senior officials opted to learn more about the Mainland's contemporary political, economic, and legal conditions by participating in a training program offered by Qinghua University in Beijing. Between 1993 and March 1997, 368 senior Hong Kong civil servants--including the first 23 principal officers in the post-reversion government-graduated from this program (Xie, 1997:1).

With reversion approaching, the orientation of Hong Kong's public servants shifted from Britain to China. Thus, most respondents in Cheng and Lee's 1993 study admitted that "they had to consult PRC officials on matters which would have an

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

effect on 1997 and beyond" (Cheng and Lee, 1996:921). Tung Chee-hwa further stressed the need to adopt a broader (cross-border) vision and the importance of understanding and communicating with the Mainland (Yeung, 1998b:12).

# Central government intervention

The extent to which the Central Government intervenes behind the scenes in SAR affairs following China's resumption of responsibility for Hong Kong presents an interesting and important question that is difficult to assess exactly from the outside (also see Rosenau, 1999:17). On the one hand, civil servants are intent on preserving their own professional neutrality and independence (see Chan, 1997:32) as well as Hong Kong's promised autonomy. This explains why a majority of directorate-grade staff expressed concern prior to the handover that PRC officials would dominate the SAR's internal affairs and why only a small minority believe that they should be accountable to Beijing (Cheng and Lee, 1996:932-936). On the other hand, senior public administrators in the Special Administrative Region recognize that they must respect the Central Government's interests and its most sensitive political concerns.

One key issue is the degree of control that Beijing seeks to exercise in practice (Yahuda, 1997:205; Davis, 1997:6). In this connection, Chief Secretary for Administration Anson Chan concluded in October 1997 that "the civil service made the transition with the maximum continuity; with its integrity intact, and operationally unchanged" (Chan, 1997:32). Furthermore, she reported that the nonconfrontational Commissioner from China's Foreign Ministry assigned to the SAR, Ma Yuzhen, "has made it quite clear that his instruction from the central Government is that he will not interfere with Hong Kong's high degree of autonomy and Hong Kong people ruling Hong Kong, and I can say that in practice he has done exactly that" (cited in South China Morning Post, 15 August 1997, p. 6; also see DeGolyer, 1999a:80). Clearly, the control exerted by the Communist Party over public administration in China (see, for instance, Dai, 1994:192-193) is not at work in the SAR. The absence of heavy-handedness on the part of Mainland authorities reflects awareness of local sensitivities. A January 1998 poll showed that a majority (62 per cent) of the SAR public favored "native Hong Kong-born officials administering Hong Kong affairs without influence from China's Government" and that a plurality (46 per cent) opposed a system of administration based on instructions from the Central Government (DeGolyer, 1999b:324; italics mine).

Nevertheless, the absence of overt indications of Central Government interference in local law making and policy formulation does not mean that Beijing's views are not considered when SAR civil servants make their decisions (Yeung, 1998c:19). It is relevant in this connection that, at a cost of $\mathsf { H K S 5 8 }$ million in the first year and $H K \$ 40$ million annually thereafter, the SAR Government opened a Beijing office in 1998 headed by a policy secretary who reports directly to the Chief Secretary for Administration.2o Among its major functions, which include trade and economic matters, immigration, education, and other issues, the Beijing office is charged with facilitating direct communication among mainland authorities and SAR civil servants regarding Central Government policies (South China Morning Post, 25 March 1998, p. 6; 26 March 1998, p. 6). Secretaryfor Constitutional Affairs Michael Suen Ming-yeung, who some hold to be "Hong Kong's most pro-Beijing senior civil servant' (Baum, 2000:459), stressed that the new office would "represent Hong Kong interests" and that there would be "absolutely no subordinate relation' to any Mainland authorities (South China Morning Post, 26 March 1998, p. 6).

Given that the Chief Executive owes allegiance to the Central Government that approved his appointment, the Mainland's positions and interests are unlikely to be ignored by the SAR Government (S.K. Lau, 1998a:19). This became most apparent when the Standing Committee of the National People's Congress (NPC) reversed a decision reached by Hong Kong's Court of Final Appeal (CFA) granting the right of SAR abode to all children born in the Mainland with at least one parent who is a current Hong Kong permanent resident. The Court's action came in response to Tung Chee-hwa's controversial and legally questionable request for an "interpretation" by the NPC of the CFA's judgment on the right-of-abode issue (see Chan, 1999; Landler, 1999:A3) in the wake of expressions of disapproval with the CFA decision by Mainland authorities (see Rosenthal, 1999:A18).21

# Public assessments of institutions and actors involved in policy making

A valuable comparative data base regarding public perceptions of the pre- and post-transfer governments exists in 16 surveys conducted by the Hong Kong Transition Project since 1993. These findings (as reported in DeGolyer, 1999b:304, 306, 313, 310; 1999a:101-103) reveal, first, that public satisfaction with the performance of the Hong Kong Government fell to 37 per cent in June 1998-down from 73 per cent in February 1997-with 56 per cent dissatisfied.22 Moreover, 40 per cent of those surveyed expressed worry over the Hong Kong Government's efficiency--twice the percentage concerned in February 1997.

Concomitantly, Anson Chan's "popularity hit heights far beyond any attained by Governor Chris Patten and... stayed above those of her new boss, Tung Chee-hwa" (DeGolyer, 1999a:79). By June 1998, only 46 per cent of those surveyed reported being satisfied with the Chief Executive's performance while 47 per cent expressed dissatisfaction.23 In comparison, 71 per cent indicated satisfaction with the Chief Secretary for Administration's performance and only 19 per cent were dissatisfied.

In April 1998, 56 per cent of the respondents expressed satisfaction with the performance of the Hong Kong Government in dealing with the Mainland and 67 per cent (up from 17 per cent in September 1995) reported satisfaction with the Central Government's performance in dealing with Hong Kong affairs. Moreover, worries about corruption in Hong Kong diminished dramatically following the handover-from 49 per cent worried in June 1997 to 27 per cent in June 1998.

# Conclusion: One government, multiple systems

Decolonization in Hong Kong differed from the historic pattern in that the British prepared not for independence, but for a late 20th Century handover to another sovereign nation (Lau, 1997:30). This unusual anticipated outcome influenced the transition process in ways that directly and indirectly affected the practice of public-policy making. Most visibly, the reversion agreements signed with China constrained the transition options available to Britain. Instead of embarking on the wholesale transfer of power to the people of Hong Kong and imposing the departing colonialist's desired political-administrative system, this situation forced the British to balance the interests and demands of Hong Kong elites, the West, and China (see Lau, 1997:32-33). The resulting unintegrated mix of institutional role continuities and changes in the period immediately leading up to and following the resumption of Chinese sovereignty has fragmented responsibility for policy making and diffused public accountability.

Nearly two-thirds (64 per cent) of the SAR residents surveyed in April 1998 felt that the reunification with China under the one country/two systems approach constituted the "best arrangement' for Hong Kong (DeGolyer, 1999b:316). However, in light of the mix of competing governance models at stake in the SAR, one no longer could be certain of the meaning residents affixed to the Hong Kong "system." The next section provides a cumulative assessment of reversion's impact on institutional involvement in the public-policy-making process.

# Changing, clashing, and emerging roles

With the transfer of sovereignty, the environment of public administration in Hong Kong became increasingly politicized. Civil servants now encounter political pressures and conflicting demands from Beijing, from the pro-democracy forces, from members of the Legislative Council, and from the business community (also see Cheng and Lee, 1996:912; S.K. Lau, 1997:48).24 Given the broader political mobilization of the population (see Rosenau, 1999:13) and the increased transparency that surrounds government operations, it no longer is possible to engage in the administrative absorption of politics through the co-optation of elites. Although the public bureaucracy remains the preeminent policy-making actor in the polity, its authority no longer is unquestioned and unchecked.

While civil servants do not monopolize policy making in post-reversion Hong Kong, no alternative actor(s) have succeeded in displacing them from their preeminent role. The Central Government exerts hidden influence. Members of the Legislative Council are eager to become respected players in the policyformulation process. The Chief Executive aims to introduce means of ensuring heightened bureaucratic responsiveness.

Intense competition for power, diverse traditions, and external influences have produced a fragmented and unstable political-administrative environment in Hong

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

Kong. Bureaucracy-dominated, executive-led, Central Government-controlled, and legislative law-enacting and oversight models clashed awkwardly in the immediate post-reversion period. In the ongoing transition from colonial to reunited polity, the Special Administrative Region's one government is composed of competing systems of governance superimposed uncomfortably and inconclusively upon one another.

# Prospective governance outcomes for the SAR

In Hong Kong, civil-service domination has been permanently ended by territorial incorporation into the Mainland and by indigenous political mobilization. By design and practice, the Legislative Council is likely to operate at the margins of policy making: The Central Government evidently appreciates that overt domination of Hong Kong affairs would alienate the local population and would not serve China's global interests (see Rosenau, 1999:14, 16). What are prospects, then, that the Chief Executive will endeavor to consolidate policy-making authority by treating Hong Kong's principal officers as "veritable ministers", or by turning Exco into a presidential-style cabinet or a council of ministers?25 Neither option is likely to be fully and successfully executed as long as the Chief Executive is not subject to popular election, lacks a power base in a majority political party or a stable coalition of parties, and is viewed less favorably by a larger proportion of the local population relative to the Chief Secretary for Administration.26

Thus, the most probable governance outcome, at least until the possible popular election of a Chief Executive and Legislative Council on a competitive politicalparty basis in 2007 (see note 17), is for fragmentation, conflict, and interest accommodation to continue to characterize the policy-making process in the SAR. In this event, the roles performed by Hong Kong's key institutional actors, including the civil service, will ebb and flow in response to coalition formation and collapse, shifts in popular perceptions regarding each actor's performance and legitimacy, and internal and external developments-particularly matters affecting living conditions and the local economy.

# Notes

1. James N. Rosenau (1999:11-12) notes that the Hong Kong transition "is one of the rare (if not the only) times that democratic authority structures (in governments, the media, and the professions) have been peacefully and legally acquired by a regime disinclined to rule in an open and democratic fashion."   
2. It is not surprising, given the sense of exclusivity that prevails among administrative officers, that conflicts should exist between members of this group and professional officers with specialist qualifications (see Lee, 1997:11; Cheung, 1996:42; Lau, 1984:189).   
3. For an expression of concern that policy secretaries often do not fully appreciate "the difficulties confronting departments in situations of tight resource constraints", see Lui (1994:50).   
4. The mandatory retirement scheme introduced for "mediocre" civil servants at directorate grades in 2000 exempts 23 principal officers. See South China Morning Post, 30 June 2000.

5. In a September 1997 address to an American Chamber of Commerce conference on "Business in Hong Kong: 2000 and Beyond," Ms Chan referred to the rule of law as "resolutely and independently at the heart of Hong Kong's way of life"; "the very essence of Hong Kong's success"; that which "protects our social and economic framework" and "promises a safe and secure environment for the individual, for families and for business to flourish"; 'this community's most prized possession"; and affirmed that the post-reversion administration has "no higher priority than the maintenance of the rule of law' (Chan, 1997:32).

6. The lack of internal coordination and communication that characterized the immediate response to the bird-flu crisis is illustrated by the following report: "Director of Health Dr Margaret Chan Fung Fu-chun ... assured residents that it was safe to consume poultry. She went as far as to declare that she had been eating chicken daily. A few days later, the Chiet Executive's Office confirmed that chicken had been taken off Tung Chee-hwa's menu, lest he would contract the "deadly virus" (Ho, 1998:19).   
7. For personal backround information regarding Elsie Leung, see South China Morning Post, 26 June 2000.   
8. Ian Scott (1984:14) concludes, however, that seniority typically has outweighed merit in promotion exercises.   
9. The Confucian tradition also values efficient and honest government (see Tsang, 1995:63).   
10. Rising expectations and increasingly demanding performance criteria also are the result of expanding political skills among Hong Kong residents (see Rosenau, 1999:13).   
11. In 1998, for instance, the Secretary for Civil Service, Lam Woon-kwang, proposed that department heads be delegated authority to employ staff on a contract rather than a permanent basis for short-term projects (Hon, 1998b:6).   
12. For an articulate defense of the Urban Council, see Ada Wong (1997:16).   
13. In February 1998, the Vice Chancellor of The University of Hong Kong, Cheng Kai-ming, publicly expressed frustration that the Education Department did not seek the advice and partnership of professionals working in the field of education before making crucial policy decisions (South China Morning Post, 22 February 1998, p. 6; also see Lo, 1998:21).   
14. Functional constituencies mainly refer to registered members of occupational groups. including workers in the industry, financial services, education, tourism, insurance, agriculture and fisheries, real estate and construction, information technology, sports and performing arts, import and export, wholesale and retail trade sectors, as well as physicians and dentists, health professionals, social workers, chamber of commerce members, and urban and regional council members. See South China Morning Post, 9 April 1998, p. 7.   
15. On the mistakes he attributes to the lack of an effective legislative-watchdog role in the immediate post-transfer period, see DeGolyer (1999a:76, 86, 96). Based on an incisive analysis of the new international airport tiasco, Eliza Lee (2000:57, 70-71) concludes that 'the political system is crucial in determining the effectiveness of the monitoring mechanism'. Her case study reveals that "in the absence of a democratic system whereby major political officials are held politically accountable by institutional mechanisms such as elections, they can escape from political responsibility for the performance of the service agents in situations where lines of responsibility are diffused and ambiguous".   
16. DeGolyer (1999a:107) points out, however, that the 'token" political-party representatives on Exco "broke or severely weakened their ties with their parties after appointment".   
17. The method of selecting the Chief Executive and all Legco members in 2007 and beyond remains open. Although he gave no indication of a firm date, President Jiang Zemin stated at the 1 July 1997 ceremony marking the formation of the SAR that "Hong Kong will, in

accordance with the Basic Law, develop democracy gradually with the ultimate aim of electing the chief executive and the Legislative Council by universal suffrage" (South China Morning Post, 24 November 1997, p. 21). Nearly two-thirds (64 per cent) of the respondents

Reproduced with permission of the copyright owner. Further reproduction prohibited without permission.

surveyed in January 1998 supported the direct election of the SAR Chief Executive in 2007 and only 8 per cent opposed that electoral method (DeGolyer, 1999b:323)   
18. Secretary Lam also publicly rejected the Hong Kong General Chamber of Commerce's call for a civil-service salary freeze in the midst of the 1998 economic slowdown (South China Morning Post, 7 June 1998, p. 4).   
19. In Cheng and Lee's 1993 survey of senior civil servants, 86 per cent of the interviewees agreed with the statement that "more considerations have now to be given to political factors when making a policy" (Cheng and Lee, 1996:921).   
20. In 1998, the head of this office received a monthly salary of approximately US\$23,205 plus additional monthly benefits that could amount to another US\$22,115 (South China Morning Post, 26 March 1998, p. 6).   
21. Most SAR residents supported the Chief Executive's challenge to the CFA's ruling in order to restrict the number of potential migrants (Landler, 1999:3). The CFA later affirmed the NPC's right to overturn its ruling (Landler, 2000:6).   
22. According to the Home Affairs Bureau bimonthly poll, the satisfaction rate had slipped to 32 per cent in mid May-with 46 per cent either dissatistied or very dissatistied with the performance of Hong Kong's civil service (South China Morning Post, 2 June 1998, p. 4). Public support for the Legislative Council and political-party leaders also declined in late 1998 and early 1999 (see Lau and Kuan, 2000: 719-720).   
23. As Tung Chee-hwa claimed to be the executive leading Hong Kong's executive-led Government, the public personally blamed him for the social and economic problems exacerbated by the Asian financial crisis (see DeGolyer, 1999a:104). Public satisfaction with Tung's administration dwindled further by July 2000 (see South China Morning Post, 2 July 2000). In September 2000, two top Hong Kong University officials, including Vice Chancellor Cheng Yiu-chung, resigned after an investigation supported charges that they, at the instigation of the Chief Executive's senior special advisor, Andrew Lo, had threatened to "dry up" University pollster Robert Chung's funding if he did not cease conducting and publishing surveys that revealed Mr Tung's low public standing. New York Times, 7 September 2000, p. A8.   
24. In June 2000, senior civil servants formally expressed concern over the extent to which the SAR civil service had become politicized (South China Morning Post, 30 June 2000).   
25. See DeGolyer's (1999a:108-109) thorough assessment of the two latter options.   
26. On the latter point, also see DeGolyer (1999a:101). Although "a courageous and visionary" Chief Executive certainly could exercise initiative in this area, DeGolyer (1999a:110) suggests that Tung Chee-hwa is "currently asleep on the tracks of necessity..."

# References

Baker, Randall. (1991). "The Role of the State and the Bureaucracy in Developing Countries Since World War Il." In Ali Farazmand (ed.), Handbook of Comparative and Development Public Administration. New York:Marcel Dekker, 353 363.   
Baum, Richard. (2000). "Democracy Deformed: Hong Kong's 1998 Legislative Elections--and Beyond." China Quarterly 162 (June), 439-464.   
Burns, John P. and lan Scott. (1984). "A Profile of the Civil Service." In lan Scott and John P. Burns (eds.), The Hong Kong Civil Service: Personnel Policies and Practices. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 17-35.   
Carino, Ledivina V. (1991). "Regime Changes, the Bureaucracy, and Political Development." In Ali Farazmand (ed.), Handbook of Comparative and Development Public Administration. New York: Marcel Dekker, 731-743.   
Chan, Anson. (1997). "Where are Allthe Prophets of Doom?" AmCham [Hong Kong] (October), 32-33.   
Chan, Stephen. (1999). "Family Unity Triggers Constitutional Crisis: Hong Kong's Right of Abode Controversy." China Rights Forum (Fall), 34 39.   
Cheng, Joseph. (1998). "Tung has to Face Democratic Reality." South China Morning Post 30 May, 14.   
Cheng, Joseph Y.S. and Jane C.Y. Lee. (1996). "The Changing Political Attitudes of the Senior Bureaucrats in Hong Kong's Transition." China Quarterly 147(September), 912-937.   
Cheung, Anthony B.L. (1995). "Financial, Managerial and Political Dimensions of Public Sector Reform." In Jane C.Y. Lee and Anthony B.L. Cheung (eds.), Public Sector Reform in Hong Kong: Key Concepts, Progress-to-Date and Future Directions. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 39-68.   
Cheung, Anthony B.L. (1996). "Efficiency as the Rhetoric: Public-sector Reform in Hong Kong Explained." International Review of Administrative Sciences 62, No. 1(March), 31-47.   
Cheung, Jimmy. (1998). $\$ 1$ 1m Cost to Top Tung's Think-tank." South China Morning Post 3 February, 4.   
Ching, Frank. (1999). "Change, Confrontation, and Community Since 1984." In Albert H. Yee (ed.), Whither Hong Kong: China's Shadow or Visionary Gleam? Lanham: University Press of America, 297-327.   
Choy, Linda. (1998). "Mainland Working Ruled Out." South China Morning Post 11 March, 6.   
Choy, Linda and Chris Yeung. (1998). "RTHK Row Invites Mainland Medding." South China Morning Post 6 March, 1.   
Dai, Guangqian. (1994). "The Establishment of an Examination and Recruitment System with Chinese Characteristics in the People's Republic of China.' In John P. Burns (ed.), Asian Civil Service Systems: Improving Efficiency and Productivity. Singapore: Times Academic Press, 189-201.   
Davis, Michael C. (1997). "Intenational Commitments to Keep: Hong Kong Beyond 1997." Paper presented at the 1997 Annual Meeting of the American Society of International Law, Washington, D.C., April.   
DeGolyer, Michael E. (1999a). "The Civil Service." In Larry Chuen-ho Chow and Yiu-kwan Fan (eds.), The Other Hong Kong Report 1998. Hong Kong: Chinese University Press, 73-114.   
DeGolyer, Michael E. (1999b). "Western Exposure, China Orientation: The Etfects of Foreign Ties and Experience on Hong Kong." In Peter H. Koehn and Joseph Y.S. Cheng (eds.), The Outlook for US.-China Relations Following the 1997-1998 Summits: Chinese and American Perspectives on Security, Trade, and Cultural Exchange. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 299 330.   
Farazmand, Ali. (1991). "Bureaucracy and Revolution: The Case of Iran." In Ali Farazmand (ed.), Handbook of Comparative and Development Public Administration. New York: Marcel Dekker, 755-767.   
Fung, Wai-kong. (1997). "Tung Rift Revealed by Freeze of Laws" South China Morning Post 11 August, 4.   
Gittings, Danny. (1998). "Playing Old Civil Service Tricks." South China Morning Post, 3 June, 16.   
Goodstadt, Leo F. (2000). "China and the Selection of Hong Kong's Post-Colonial Political Elite."' China Quarterly, 163 (December), 721741.   
Ho, Andy. (1998). "A Disease that Cripples." South China Morning Post, 6(January): 19.   
Hon, May Sin-mi. (1998a). "Civil Service Head Warns against Political Appointments," South China Morning Post 5 April, 2.   
Hon, May Sin-mi. (1998b). "Department Heads Win Wider Power." South China Morning Post, 7 April, 6.   
King, Ambrose Yeo-chi. (1981). "Administrative Absorption of Politics in Hong Kong: Emphasis on the Grass Roots Level." In Ambrose Y.C. King and Rance P.L. Lee (eds.), Social Life and Development in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 127-146.   
Koehn, Peter. (1990). Public Policy and Administration in Africa: Lessons from Nigeria. Boulder: Westview.   
Lam, Jermain T.M. and Jane C.Y. Lee. (1994). "Research Report on Administrative Culture of the Hong Kong Civil Servants." Hong Kong: Department of Public & Social Administration, City Polytechnic of Hong Kong, May.   
Landler, Mark. (1999). "Hong Kong Tries to Limit Court Ruling on Residency." New York Times 19 May, A3.   
Landler, Mark. (2000). "Protesters Set Hong Kong Immigration Office Afire." New York Times 4 August, A6.   
Lau, C.K. (1997). "Review of Pay-scale Disparity Necessary." South China Morning Post 6 November, 19.   
Lau, C.K. (1998a). "Question of Competence in Corridors of Power." South China Morning Post 10 January, 19.   
Lau, C.K. (1998b). "Tsang Lands on His Feet." South China Morning Post 20 February, 19.   
Lau, Siu-kai. (1984). Society and Politics in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press.   
Lau, Siu-kai. (1997). "Decolonisation a la Hong Kong: Britain's Search for Governability and Exit with Glory." Journal of Commonwealth and Comparative Politics 35, No. 2(July), 28-54.   
Lau, Siu-kai. (1998a). "Keeping the Chief Executive in Line."' South China Morning Post 19 February, 19.   
Lau, Siu-kai. (1998b). "Ministers in the Making." South China Morning Post 3 April, 25.   
Lau, Siu-kai and Kuan Hsin-chi. (2o0o). "Partial Democratization, Foundation Movement' and Political Parties in Hong Kong." China Quarterly, '163 (December), 705-720.   
Lee, Eliza Wing-yee. (1997). "Gender and the Making of the Hong Kong Administrative Class." Paper presented at the International Conference on Gender and Development in Asia, The Chinese University of Hong Kong, November.   
Lee, Eliza Wing-yee. (1998). "The Political Economy of Public Sector Reform in Hong Kong: The Case of a Colonial-developmental State." International Review of Administrative Sciences 64, No. 4(December), 625 641.   
Lee, Eliza Wing-yee. (2000). "The New Hong Kong International Airport Fiasco: Accountability Failure and the Limits of the New Managerialism." International Review of Administrative Sciences 66, No. 1(March), 57-72.   
Lee, Jane C.Y. (1995). "Public Sector Reform and Public Sector Accountability." In Jane C.Y. Lee and Anthony B.L. Cheung (eds.), Public Sector Reform in Hong Kong: Key Concepts, Progress-to-Date and Future Directions. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press, 71-86.   
Leung, Elsie Oi-sie. (1997). "Freedom of Speech Alive and Well." South China Morning Post 29 August, 21.   
Lieberthal, Kenneth. (1997). "The Hong Kong Factor in Sino-U.S. Relations." In Hong Kong's Transition: Context and Implications from Both Sides of the Pacific. New York: Asia Society, April, 25-35.   
Lo, Shiu-hing. (1998). "A Crisis of Government." South China Morning Post 20 July, 21.   
Lo, Shiu-hing. (2000). "Final Appeal in Hong Kong." China Quarterly 161(March), 221-239.   
Lui, Ting Terry. (1984). "Recruitment and Selection." In lan Scott and John P. Burns (eds.), The Hong Kong Civil Service: Personnel Policies and Practices. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 59 95.   
Lui, T.T. (1994). "Efficiency as a Political Concept in the Hong Kong Government: Issues and Problems." In John P. Burns. (ed.), Asian Civil Service Systems: Improving Efficiency and Productivity. Singapore: Times Academic Press, 17-58.   
Ma, Stephen K. (1996). Administrative Reform in Post-Mao China: Eficiency or Ethics. Lanham: University Press of America.   
Miners, Norman. (1995). The Government and Politics of Hong Kong. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 5th Edition.   
Mushkat, Miron. (1984). "Staffing the Administrative Class." In lan Scott and John P. Burns. (eds.)., The Hong Kong Civil Service: Personnel Policies and Practices. Hong Kong: Oxtord University Press, 96-117.   
Ng, Margaret. (1997). "Executive's Cloak of Legality."' South China Morning Post 22 August, 19.   
Pepper, Suzanne. (2000). "Elections, Political Change and Basic Law Government: The Hong Kong System in Search of a Political Form." China Quarterly 162(June), 410- 438.   
Richburg, Keith B. "Hong Kong Leaders are Criticized Openly." International Herald Tribune. 5 January, 4.   
Rosenau, James N. (1999). "Authority in Crisis: A Global Process and a Hong Kong Reality." Asian Journal of Political Science. 7, 2 (December), 1-20.   
Rosenthal, Elisabeth. (1999). "Hong Kong Court Strains Ties with Beijing, Saying It Has Last Word on Local Charter." New York Times 11 February, A18.   
Scott, lan. (1984). "Introduction."' In Ian Scott and John P. Bums. (eds.), The Hong Kong Civil Service: Personnel Policies and Practices. Hong Kong: Oxford University Press, 1-16.   
Tsang, Donald. (1995). "Public Sector Reform: Key Issues and Future Directions." In Jane C.Y. Lee and Anthony B.L. Cheung (eds.), Public Sector Reform in Hong Kong: Key Concepts, Progress-to-Date and Future Directions. Hong Kong: The Chinese University Press,3-14.   
Tsang, Steve. (1997). "Government and Politics in Hong Kong: A Colonial Paradox." In Judith M. Brown and Rosemary Foot (eds)., Hong Kong's Transitions, 1842-1997. New York: St. Martin's Press:62-83.   
Wong, Ada. (1997). "Vision Needed in Review of Councils." South China Morning Post 8 November, 16.   
Wong, Fanny. (1997). "Guess Where the Buck Stops." South China Morning Post 23 September, 21.   
Xie, Liangjun. (1997). "Officials Learn about Mainland at Qinghua University." China Daily 18 March, 1.   
Yahuda, Michael. (1997). "Hong Kong: A New Beginning for China?" In Judith M. Brown and Rosemary Foot (eds.), Hong Kong's Transitions, 1842-1997. New York: St. Martin's Press, 192-210.   
Yeung, Chris. (1997). "Expats Allowed to Speak for SAR." South China Morning Post 9 November, 2.   
Yeung, Chris. (1998a). "Anson Chan Ready to Postpone Retirement." South China Morning Post 30 June, 6.   
Yeung, Chris. (1998b). "Chief and Anson Forge Uneasy Alliance." South China Morning Post 12 January, 12.   
Yeung, Chris. (1998c). "People Power to the Rescue." South China Morning Post 4 July, 19.   
Yeung, Chris. (1998d). "Public Seeks Reassurance Rather than Relief in the Year's Budget." South China Morning Post 14 February, 17.   
Yeung, Chris. (1998e). "Role of Civil Servants Comes under Scrutiny." South China Morning Post 1 July, 14.

Peter H. Koehn is Professor of Political Science at The University of Montana - Missoula. Through the Fulbright Senior Scholar Program, he served as Director of Research and Development at the Hong Kong-America Center and Visiting Professor in the Department of Government and Public Administration, Chinese University of Hong Kong, during the 1997-1998 academic year. His publications include The Outlook for U.S.-China Relations Following the 1997-1998 Summits: Chinese and American Perspectives on Security, Trade, and Cultural Exchange, co-edited with Joseph Y.S. Cheng (Chinese University Press, 1999); Making Aid Work: Innovative Approaches for Africa at the Turn of the Century, co-edited with Olatunde J. B. Ojo (University Press of America, 1999), and Public Policy and Administration in Africa: Lessons from Nigeria (Westview Press, 1990).