# 1. Introduction: Why this Special Issue?

# 1.1. Background to the Special Issue

In the last few decades, there have been numerous calls for more research to inform business English pedagogy (e.g., Angouri, 2010; Bargiela & Zhang, 2013; Chan, 2009, 2017; Hewings & Nickerson, 1999; Ilie, Nickerson, & Planken, 2019; Koester, 2002; Nickerson, 2005; Nickerson & Planken, 2016; St John, 1996). More specifically, in the editorial for the last Special Issue on business English in English for Specific Purposes, Nickerson (2005) noted that few published materials were based on research, as her survey of materials on Amazon.co.uk showed, and called for more researchers who are also practitioners (i.e., researcher-practitioners) to share their “research-based teaching accounts” (p. 375). At the same time, over the same period of time, we have seen an increase in linguistic research into different business English genres and communicative events (see Ilie et al., 2019 and Nickerson & Planken, 2016), and also some teaching materials (co-authored) by researchers that incorporate authentic business language and research findings (e.g., Handford, Lisboa, Koester, & Pitt, 2012; Koester, 2004; Koester, Pitt, Handford, & Lisboa, 2012; Lisboa & Handford, 2012; Riddford & Newton, 2010). While this is a welcome trend, we need not only researchers who suggest ways to turn research findings into materials and methods, but also practitioners who can see the value of research, who are able to make use of relevant findings to inform their pedagogical practice and who can point to areas of research that would benefit their practice. This Special Issue is an attempt to give such practitioners a voice as well as to provide researchers with an opportunity to reflect on their previous work.

Previous calls for action to strengthen the interface between research and pedagogy in business English have been directed almost exclusively at researchers, urging them, for example, to conduct more research and suggest ideas for incorporating research into teaching. The role that practitioners can play in finding ways to use research, however, has rarely been highlighted and discussed in the literature, obscuring the contribution that practitioners can make by linking research and pedagogy in actual teaching and learning contexts. The neglect of this role that practitioners can play perhaps reflects the epistemological belief that Sato and Loewen (2022) discuss in their article on language teaching in generaldthe belief that researchers are “knowledge producers and holders” and practitioners are “consumers of knowledge” (p. 512).

It is in the belief that researchers and practitioners have an equally important role to play in creating a stronger interface between research and pedagogy that this Special Issue was conceived. Not only do we believe that both researchers and practitioners can be producers of knowledge, but we also believe that they can both be consumers of the knowledge that each produces and learn from and be inspired by each other. Indeed, as Nickerson (2005) and Chan (2017, 2024 in this Special Issue) have noted, researchers and practitioners are not two distinct groups of professionals; they often wear the same hats, and the same person can be a researcher and a practitioner at different times in their career. This Special Issue, therefore, is aimed at providing an avenue for both researchers and practitioners to explore the pedagogical applications of research, to share innovative pedagogical ideas, and to suggest future directions that would benefit the field.

Most special issues in academic journals provide a collection of new research articles, but this Special Issue has taken a different approach. We selected 10 articles published since 2005 (the year that the last Special Issue on English as a lingua franca in international business was published in English for Specific Purposes; Nickerson, 2005) and asked contributors to comment on the influence of the articles. Revisiting existing articles let them see how far the research had influenced pedagogy so far and could also help to suggest future directions and identify new gaps in our disciplinary knowledge that still need to be filled.

For each of the 10 articles we invited not only the original author (or in two cases another researcher) to write a researcher commentary, but also another contributor to provide a practitioner commentary. Although the terms “researcher commentaries” and “practitioner commentaries” are used in this Special Issue to refer to the two types of commentary, it should be noted that they refer to the perspective from which the contributor wrote, rather than to the writer’s status as either a researcher who does not teach or a practitioner who does not conduct research. In fact, among the contributors there are clearly researcher-practitioners who wear both a researcher’s hat and a practitioner’s hat at all times.

We hope that this Special Issue will help to move the field forward by encouraging discussion and reflection on different ways of using research in pedagogical practice. We believe that considering not only researchers’ but also practitioners’ perspectives is especially important because it can help researchers learn from practitioners’ experiences and ideas, as well as the other way around.

# 1.2. Aims and scope

This Special Issue focuses on how to incorporate the research findings on a number of key areas in English for Specific Business Purposes (ESBP) into business English teaching. It explores how the findings from this research can be used to identify the knowledge and skills that learners of business English need to be successful professional communicators, as well as providing suggestions on how those findings can best be incorporated into teaching materials and activities. More specifically, it focuses on four different themes of relevance for business English and professional practice (discourse, communication process, professional practice, and pedagogy), as represented by a set of articles that have appeared in English for Specific Purposes from 2005 onwards, the year of the previously mentioned Special Issue. The 2005 Special Issue is a relevant starting point also in light of the groundbreaking discussion of Business English as a Lingua Franca (BELF) as a construct by Louhiala-Salminen, Charles, and Kankaanranta (2005) within it, which helped to shape research in the field of business English using an ESP approach, with a particular focus on professional practice. Our intention here is to revisit a set of papers that represent the field of ESBP, to trace its development since 2005, and at the same time, to promote the idea of researchinformed pedagogy among practitioners. Finally, and most importantly, we want to highlight the ways in which research can be used to underpin business English teaching in a meaningful way.

The lack of reference to research findings in the vast majority of commercially produced business English textbooks has long been a source of concern. As noted above, Nickerson (2005) presented a search of the Amazon.co.uk site in 2004, which identified only two corpus-based books that made any specific mention of a link with research, i.e., Mascull (2004) and Collins Cobuild (2004), both of which were advanced business vocabulary books rather than textbooks designed for classroom use. Eight years later, Bargiela-Chiappini, Nickerson and Planken (2013) provide a more extensive overview of commercially produced teaching materials of relevance for business discourse and business communication by again surveying Amazon.co.uk, together with the book reviews listed in three journals (the International Journal of Business Communication, the Business and Professional Communication Quarterly, and English for Specific Purposes), with a similar result. The authors note how few and far between research-based materials still were at that time, in comparison to the very extensive textbook market focusing on the teaching of business English and business communication. And while they also acknowledge that the sources they looked at may not be exhaustive, they point out that these represented the major sources of information “available to practitioners around the world that have a vested interest in keeping their respective readerships up to date with the latest developments in the field” (p. 160). Of the research-based teaching materials that they identify and look at in detail, the volumes by Koester et al. (2012), by Schnurr (2013) and by Lockwood and McCarthy (2010) still provide relevant, and rare, examples of data-driven textbooks that look at different aspects of workplace communication (see also Ilie et al. (2019) for further discussion). Later in this editorial, we will also look at Chan’s (2009) research-informed approach to evaluating published business English materials and her application of this approach in evaluating contemporary textbook materials, which provided “evidence of the divide between the language taught in contemporary textbooks and that used in business situations” (Chan, 2024, p. 25).

The disconnect between research and professional practice in teaching business English is also highlighted in later work which looks at more than just textbooks. For instance, 12 years after the publication of the business English as a lingua franca Special Issue, Chan (2017) writes:

In business English, many researchers are also “active as practitioners” (Nickerson, 2005, p. 374). [.] However, despite Nickerson’s (2005) important call for more research-based teaching accounts, few researcher-practitioners have reported on their own research-informed practice, and even fewer have published any findings from pedagogicallyoriented research conducted with their own learners. (p. 73)

And around the same time, Angouri (2018) notes:

In recent years, practitioners and researchers alike have called for greater dialogue between those who teach and those who research workplace talk (e.g., Chan, 2009; Bremner, 2010; Bowles, 2006). Despite the interest from both groups, there is still only limited interaction. Bao (2013) makes a convincing claim for a constant dialogue between textbook material and real life, so that the materials designer allows space for ‘writer–user interaction’. This interaction can clearly be facilitated by dialogue between researchers and practitioners. Yet, time and again research shows that teaching resources and classroom practices continue to be at odds with the reality of the workplace (see Chan, 2009; Riddiford & Newton, 2010). (p. 4)

The lack of interaction between research and practice has a number of different underlying causes. First of all, while some researchers may also be active as practitioners in their own academic institutions, their research may not necessarily be aimed at influencing pedagogical practice. Nickerson (2005) also notes that even when there are pedagogical implications, these are typically mentioned briefly in the conclusion to their research articles with no further discussion, and, as Chan (2017) observes, researcher-practitioners may face “various practical constraints, such as the lack of time and resources for data collection in and out of class, the difficulty of obtaining stakeholders’ consent to collect data that may seem confidential, and the mismatch between the syllabus and the research topic(s) of interest” (p. 73). Secondly, practitioners may not always be aware of relevant research findings, as outside of the academic context, these are often hidden behind a paywall, although more open access articles have become available in recent years. Furthermore, while many practitioners may have good ideas for using research in teaching, these rarely appear in academic journals, probably because full-length research articles require much more than just the presentation of new teaching ideas, and practitioners may have neither the time nor the resources to contextualize their ideas within the existing literature. Thirdly, while some researchers and practitioners may work together within a shared, institutional context in academia, collaborations between researchers in academic contexts and practitioners within business and industry are uncommon (but see Chan and Frendo (2014) for an exception). Finally, the lack of an appropriate publishing outlet for practitioners’ accounts means that researchers in turn are generally not aware of the ways in which their findings have been or could be applied.

In summary, despite the widespread recognition of the gap between business English research and pedagogy for the past two decades, it seems clear that much still remains to be done to address this. Our hope is that this Special Issue will address this disconnect in two main ways: i) by making researchers more aware of the ways in which research findings such as those reported in the 10 selected articles in the Special Issue may be used by practitioners (in perhaps unexpected ways), and ii) by making practitioners more aware of the different ways in which research findings could be used in their teaching. Our intention is to try to increase accessibility for practitioners as well as to provide a space in which researchers and practitioners can converse, engage with and inspire each other. The Special Issue therefore seeks to improve the accessibility of research, alongside the visibility of practice. We see this as a closing the loop exercise that explores how research into professional practice can be used recursively to underpin pedagogical practice. We also hope that the ideas proposed in the practitioner commentaries will inspire other practitioners to engage in research-informed pedagogical practice in their own teaching contexts.

# 2. ESBP and professional communication

# 2.1. Literature review

The 2005 Special Issue on lingua franca business English was an attempt to answer the call in Hewings and Nickerson (1999) for more appropriate research that could be used to inform business English teaching, which until that time had largely still been framed as linguistic research. The Special Issue was influential on the field of professional communication in particular, in that it included the study by Louhiala-Salminen et al. (2005) of a corporate merger, which introduced the concept of business English as a lingua franca (BELF), and it also included the accounts by Chew (2005) and by Planken (2005), which moved beyond linguistic research towards an investigation of the influence of the professional context. Chew (2005) looked at the difficulties experienced by new entrants into the banking profession in Hong Kong, and Planken (2005) at the management of rapport in negotiations by students with no working experience compared to that of experienced professionals. The establishment of BELF that was inherent in these studies helped to shape the discipline and to move it ondat least in researchdfrom a reliance on native speaker models. The shift beyond linguistic research in these studies also helped to show that other types of research can also have important pedagogical implications.

Since 2005, business English research has continued to look at various aspects of BELF, as well as continuing to explore how the professional context and professional practice influence the way in which talk or writing are used as discourse in commercial organizations in order to get work done (Bargiela-Chiappini et al., 2013, p. 3). In her recent overview on ESP and English as a lingua franca (ELF), Nickerson (forthcoming) notes, for instance, that “In the time since the 2005 Special Issue appeared in English for Specific Purposes, (.), the journal has published a total of 70 additional research articles on BELF, an indication of the interest within the ESP scholarly community in this specific form of ELF and also an indication as to the social domain in which many users of ELF are operating”. In addition, Basturkmen (2022) also points to the increasing use of ELF in her overview of ESP studies in the Asia Pacific region, which includes a large number of studies that focus on ELF use in business and other professional contexts. Furthermore, Bhatia (2022) has recently re-emphasized the need for research to focus on professional competence and has observed that all learners of ESP, including first language speakers of English, need to understand how to use the communicative genres associated with their profession. As Nickerson (forthcoming) comments, this focus on professional competence “is an important point that blurs the boundaries between different groups of English language users and the skills they need to operate successfully in professional contexts”. In other words, as is also shown in Chan (2019, 2021b), the focus on professional competence pinpoints the fact that there is a set of skills that all professionals need to learn before they can confidently handle workplace tasks, regardless of their rank and proficiency in English.

In the time since the 2005 Special Issue appeared, understanding more about professional practice has indeed been of interest to business English researchers. For instance, there has been an increasing emphasis on the learner or user of business English, and their learning experience, as exemplified in the studies by Chan (2019) and by Zhang (2013) included in this Special Issue, and also a focus on the discourse processes that occur in professional contexts, as is the case in the studies by Flowerdew and Wan (2010) and Warren (2013) that we also include. Furthermore, there has also been an increasing interest in understanding more about business English learners’ and users’ on-the-job learning experiences to inform business English pedagogy (see, for example, Chan 2019, 2021a, 2021b). These developments have facilitated what Chan (2017) has referred to as “pedagogically-oriented research”, and they provide fertile ground, in particular, for the practitioners’ commentaries that we are showcasing here.

# 2.2. Research themes in this Special Issue

The 10 studies that we have included in this Special Issue fall into four important research themes that have helped to define the field of business English as it relates to professional practice. All of them appeared in English for Specific Purposes between 2005 and 2019. While not exhaustive, we believe that these 10 articles can be seen as representative of the way in which the field of business English has developed over the past two decades. The first stream of research encompasses studies investigating specific genres and the discourse features that characterize business English, including genres such as negotiations, meetings, email, and other forms of computer-mediated communication, and encompassing different characteristics of business discourse. The second stream of research focuses on studies that go beyond the genres that are produced in business contexts, to also examine the professional communication processes that define them, such as the use of intertextuality, interdiscursivity, and English used as a lingua franca in business contexts. The third stream of research looks at studies that investigate the learning experiences of business English learners or users and the communication challenges they face in first becoming a member of a profession and then progressing throughout their career. And the final stream of research illustrates how research findings related to both discourse and pedagogy can best be used to inform pedagogical practice. One or more of these four interrelated themes of discourse, communication process, professional practice and pedagogy underpin each of the studies in the Special Issue and the commentaries that accompany them.

Once we had identified these 10 studies, we then asked 10 contributors to review one of the studies and provide a short commentary on the work. Most of these commentaries were written by the original researchers themselves or by a co-author on the study (except the studies by Chan (2019) and Evans (2013)). The authors of researcher commentaries were Clarice Chan, John Flowerdew, Julio Gimenez, Anne Kankaanranta, Almut Koester, Brigitte Planken, Pamela Rogerson-Revell, Alvaro Subero-Sáenz, Martin Warren, and Zuocheng Zhang. We asked them to consider the significance of the paper, both theoretical and/or pedagogical, the influence on the field, and what future directions similar research could take, including any new gaps that now need to be filled.

In parallel, we also asked 10 contributors to comment on one of the research studies from a practitioner’s perspective. The authors of the practitioner commentaries all have had substantial experience in teaching or training business English, encompassing all three of the business English teaching contexts identified by Chan and Frendo (2014) as being representative of the field, i.e., corporate training (Katrin Lichterfeld, Vicky Margari, Dana Poklepovic, Alan Simpson), tertiary education (Peter Davidson, Lisa Leopold, Philip Saxon, Aiden Yeh), and adult education (Oksana Hera, Uma Tadema). We asked these contributors to consider the significance of the findings for practice, including the practical applications of the research, e.g., how the findings could be taken into account when developing courses, in identifying needs, in evaluating and choosing materials, or in designing materials or tasks for their learners. We also asked the practitioners to provide sample activities or other suggestions as to how the findings could inform approaches to designing business English courses or curricula, as well as to consider what future research would be helpful for practitioners. Once completed, we invited at least one researcher and one practitioner to review each commentary.

The 10 studies that we included are as follows:

1) Chan, C. S. C. (2009). Forging a link between research and pedagogy: A holistic framework for evaluating business English materials. English for Specific Purposes, 28(2), 125–136. This study is concerned with pedagogy and provides a framework for practitioners to refer to in evaluating and selecting appropriate business English materials. Chan provides a researcher’s commentary, and Simpson a practitioner’s commentary.   
2) Chan, C. S. C. (2019). Long-term workplace communication needs of business professionals: Stories from Hong Kong senior executives and their implications for ESP and higher education. English for Specific Purposes, 56, 68–83. This study traces changes in how professional practice impacts the use of business English over the course of a person’s career. Planken provides a researcher’s commentary, and Lichterfeld a practitioner’s commentary.   
3) Evans, S. (2013). “Just wanna give you guys a bit of an update”: Insider perspectives on business presentations in Hong Kong. English for Specific Purposes, 32(4), 195–207. This study looks at both discourse realizations in the genre of business presentations, as well as at the impact of professional practice. Subero-Sáenz provides a researcher’s commentary, and Leopold a practitioner’s commentary.   
4) Flowerdew, J., & Wan, A. (2010). The linguistic and the contextual in applied genre analysis: The case of the company audit report. English for Specific Purposes, 29(2), 78–93. This study focuses on the communication processes surrounding the writing of an audit report and at how these are reflected in professional practice. Flowerdew provides a researcher’s commentary, and Saxon a practitioner’s commentary.   
5) Gimenez, J. (2014). Multi-communication and the business English class: Research meets pedagogy. English for Specific Purposes, 35, 1–16. This study looks at the discourse realizations of various forms of computer mediated communication

and identifies the strategies that business people need to develop in order to communicate effectively when using them. Gimenez provides the researcher’s commentary, and Margari the practitioner’s commentary.

6) Koester, A. (2014). “We’d be prepared to do something, like if you say.” hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations. English for Specific Purposes, 36, 35–46. This study focuses on the discourse realizations of hypothetical reported speech as it is used within the genre of business negotiations. Koester provides the researcher’s commentary, and Tadema the practitioner’s commentary.   
7) Louhiala-Salminen, L., Charles, M., & Kankaanranta, A. (2005). English as a lingua franca in Nordic corporate mergers: Two case companies. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 401–421. This seminal study presents the original construct of BELF, together with a contrastive study of the discourse realizations used in BELF interactions by business people from different national cultures. Kankaanranta provides a researcher’s commentary, and Poklepovic a practitioner’s commentary.   
8) Rogerson-Revell, P. (2008). Participation and performance in international business meetings. English for Specific Purposes, 27(3), 338–360. This study investigates BELF interactions in international business meetings, and in particular the contributions made to the discourse of those meetings by first language speakers of English compared to others. Rogerson-Revell provides a researcher’s commentary, and Hera a practitioner’s commentary.   
9) Warren, M. (2013). “Just spoke to.”: The types and directionality of intertextuality in professional discourse. English for Specific Purposes, 32(1), 12–24. This study looks at the use of intertextuality in the discourse realizations of business emails. Warren provides a researcher’s commentary, and Yeh a practitioner’s commentary.   
10) Zhang, Z. (2013). Business English students learning to write for international business: What do international business practitioners have to say about their texts? English for Specific Purposes, 32(3), 144–156. This study focuses on professional practice and the process of becoming a member of a professional community. Zhang provides the research commentary, and Davidson the practitioner’s commentary.

# 3. Research and professional practice in teaching and training

The researcher commentaries provided new insights into the development of the field over the last two decades, as each contributor reflected on the influence of the original study in cognate areas of research. Warren (2023), for instance, notes that in the time since his original study on intertextuality appeared in 2013, there has been an acknowledgement that the realizations of intertextuality may vary across different cultures (Ngai, Singh, & Kwan, 2020), while Rogerson-Revell (2023), reports on a continuing interest in issues of power relations and marginalization in meetings where first language speakers of English are involved with BELF users at various levels of proficiency, since the publication of her study on intercultural meetings in 2008 (e.g., Takino, 2020). Other researchers, such as Kankaanranta (2023), reflecting on Louhiala-Salminen et al.’s (2005) introduction of BELF in 2005, and Gimenez (2023), revisiting his own study of multi communication in 2014, also reflect on the changes that have occurred in workplace communication over the past two decades that are of particular relevance for their research focus, such as the exponential rise in digital communication and remote working across borders; they identify areas of future interest for researchers as a result of these changes. Some commentaries provide evidence of the influence on pedagogy, as is the case in the increase in the incorporation of intertextuality into teaching and learning (e.g., Bremner & Costley, 2018) noted by Warren, and the influence of BELF on graduate education and on corporate training observed by Kankaanranta; others, such as Subero-Sáenz (2023), commenting on Evans’ (2013) study of business presentations in Hong Kong, Flowerdew (2023), revisiting his co-authored study of audit reports (Flowerdew & Wan, 2010), and Koester (2024), reviewing her 2014 study of hypothetical reported speech in negotiations, renew calls for pedagogical applications of the research, despite the complexity that this may entail. Both Subero-Sáenz and Flowerdew cite Chan (2018) as a useful way of approaching curriculum development for specific business English topics that are likely to fall outside of the purview of most commercially available textbook materials, while Chan (2024) herself revisits her 2009 paper on evaluating the appropriacy of materials for specific learning contexts in business English teaching and training, and reflects on its continuing relevance, not only to business English but also other fields. Finally, Planken (2023), reviewing Chan’s (2019) study of changes in business professionals’ needs over the course of their careers, and Zhang (2023), reflecting on his own 2013 study of business professionals’ perceptions of student writing, reiterate the need for those involved in researching and teaching ESBP to understand more about how individuals engage with and then maintain that engagement with their professional group or community of practice. In summary, in terms of discourse and process, the researcher commentaries suggest a continuing concern with intercultural and digital communication, and in terms of professional practice and pedagogy, they highlight the continuing need to understand how the former can best be reflected in the latter.

The practitioners’ commentaries can be grouped together under three main themes according to the contexts within which the practitioners are teaching or training, i.e., corporate training, tertiary education or adult education. The different approaches that are put forward in each case suggest how the ESBP discipline could move forward in considering which research methodologies to use and which topics to select, in order to best contribute to pedagogical practice.

# 3.1. Practitioners working in corporate training

A number of the practitioners working as corporate trainers within business and industry show how to use an ESP approach to create materials based on the research they reviewed, sometimes in combination with other forms of management training or coaching. For instance, in her commentary on Chan (2019), Lichterfeld (2024) identifies ways to support managers who rely on English as a lingua franca to develop the battery of communication skills that they need as their career progresses, such as effective leadership and relationship building skills, alongside the enduring need for advanced proficiency in English. Drawing from her own experience as a corporate trainer working in Germany, Lichterfeld’s perspectives align with those of Chan, despite the fact that this is a very different geographical context from Chan’s research context in Hong Kong. Lichterfield notes, “Spoken communication is frequently carried out in German, whereas written communication is predominantly done in English because of globalization and the fact that there are many employees with an international background” (2023, p. 2). To help managers to develop the skills that they need while communicating in English, she advocates using narrative work and establishing a community of practice, using coaching as a frame of reference. In particular, she draws on ideas from Bruner (1991) and Molinsky (2023) to encourage learners to reflect on their own individual cultural identity and in doing so to develop the relationship-building skills that they need. Likewise, in her commentary on Louhiala-Salminen et al. (2005), Poklepovic (2023) also advocates using a coaching approach in combination with incorporating different modes of communication into teaching materials. Poklepovic notes that the study points to the need for effective ways of interacting within BELF, which could now be achieved through the use of agile formats such as instant messaging, but also to address the need to “manage their perceptions and beliefs about their own and the other speakers’ cultures” (Poklepovic, 2023, p. 144). She suggests chat groups that simulate a merger could help learners practice one set of skills, whereas the double-clicking coaching technique created by Glaser (2016) can facilitate the development of another.

Margari’s (2023) commentary on the study of multi-communication by Gimenez (2014) focuses on how to update and incorporate his findings in training experienced business people a decade on from when the original study took place. Margari’s contention is that the people she trains in corporate settings likely have considerable experience in multicommunication. She leverages that experience in her proposed tasks that reveal how the roles and relationships involved in the communication are reflected in the selection of medium, genre and communication strategies. To provide more insights into how multi-communication is used in organizational contexts and formulate her classroom tasks, Margari draws on the two lines of research. The first is research by Cameron (and colleagues) in the academic management literature, e.g., Cameron, Barki, Ortiz de Guinea, Coulon and Moshki (2018). The second is the leadership literature written as a self-help guide for a management audience, e.g., Dhawan (2021).

Finally, in the commentary on Chan’s (2009) framework for evaluating business English materials, Simpson (2024) shows how he (and colleagues) adapted this framework for very specific corporate training contexts in Japan. In one iteration, Simpson (2016) illustrates how the framework was used to evaluate the appropriateness of a business English textbook for his students who were engineers; in the second iteration, Simpson (2018) shows how the framework served as course development guidelines when designing and evaluating materials developed in house for Japanese engineers and chemical researchers in a large engineering firm; in the third iteration, Simpson and Mork (2021) show how Chan’s framework was adapted to inform the design of a tailor-made course for Japanese bank employees as well as to aid in the post-course evaluation of the materials and methods. In each case, research on relevant topics was consulted and incorporated into checklists adapted from Chan (2009). Reflecting on his experience of applying Chan’s framework and using her researchinformed checklists, Simpson (2024) notes the lack of comparable frameworks that practitioners could benefit from and calls for the development of more checklists that can be applied to ESP topics. He also discusses how using research-informed checklists for post-course reflection can lead to pedagogical improvement and support practitioners’ professional development.

# 3.2. Practitioners working in tertiary education

Several of the practitioners working in academic contexts in which learners have little or no work experience have taken ideas directly from the research that they reviewed as the basis for a set of teaching activities, while others have adapted or extended these for the classroom or other teaching contexts and combined them with other pedagogical approaches. Saxon’s (2023) commentary on Flowerdew and Wan’s (2010) study of audit reports, for instance, provides a role-playing exercise for the roles of a junior auditor and a technical manager, which allows the participants to reflect on the processes surrounding the creation of an audit report, including the language and media that could be used, together with any other documents that could be referred to. The role-play is constructed such that the participants are required to learn as much about the processes and roles surrounding the report, and not just about the language required. Likewise, in Yeh’s (2023) reflection on Warren’s studies of intertextuality (Warren, 2013, 2016), she refers directly to his findings and suggests that some of his original email transcripts would be useful for learners, along with some scaffolding work where necessary, and offers ideas on how best to approach this. She also suggests adapting Warren’s research questions to focus learners on intertextuality and the relationships between the people involved in the discourse, while at the same time making the research questions easier to understand. For example, “Are there recurrent words and phrases associated with instances of intertextuality?” in the original study, becomes “Are there recurrent words and phrases associated with/to the previous email correspondence?” in the learners’ materials. She recommends working with learners to analyze authentic email correspondence that is in the public domain (such as the Enron email database) and suggests how to adapt other sets of email tasks designed to practice intertextuality for use in other tertiary contexts like her own in Taiwan, such as that originally proposed by Bremner and Costley (2018) in Hong Kong.

Davidson’s (2023) commentary on Zhang (2013) reflects on the relevance of Zhang’s findings for learners of business English with little or no professional experience, and draws from his own experience as a business English practitioner in an academic context in the Middle East. He emphasizes the need to introduce learners to business writing as a set of communicative genres, rather than providing them with static model texts which they can usually replicate but without any understanding of how they are used in context. He reiterates the fact that commercially published materials often persist in presenting this type of disconnect. He then puts forward Scenario Based Assessment (SBA), as proposed by Deane and Sparks (2019), as a way of mitigating this further and extending Zhang’s findings. He provides an example of a thematically interlinked SBA for use in business contexts that relies on intertextuality and interdiscursivity between different business genres, as well as providing learners with an experience of working with such genres in a semi-authentic way, as they complete the assessment.

Finally, Leopold (2023) draws on her extensive experience teaching international graduate students in the United States to propose a set of teaching activities focused on materials available on the internet, e.g., TED talks or easily accessible presentations given by notable people such as Barack Obama and Steve Jobs, which are designed to address those characteristics of the professional business presentations identified in Evans’ (2013) study of workplace presentations in Hong Kong. Leopold’s series of seven sets of activities provides learners with different ways of practicing the skill sets that Evans notes in his study are needed in giving effective presentations, including important skills such as dealing with questions and answers (Appendix C in Leopold) and improving eye contact (Appendix F in Leopold); these activities effectively bridge the gap between Evans’ findings and the implications of those findings for pedagogical practice.

# 3.3. Practitioners working in adult education

The commentary by Tadema (2023) on Koester’s (2014) study of hypothetical reported speech (HRS) in business meetings provides practitioners working in adult education with ideas on how to evaluate research findings, together with commercially available textbook materials, in order to create a set of appropriate teaching materials. Tadema first selects the most relevant findings from Koester’s study and then compares them with the materials presented in twelve popular textbooks. She finds that HRS is absent in their units on negotiations. To address this gap, she then advocates working with advanced learners on reported speech in general, and HRS in particular, using recordings and transcripts of authentic negotiations as examples. Finally, she provides a set of both general and work-related classroom activities that introduce learners to the concept of HRS and how it can be used to underpin a proposal, a refusal, or a summary. Tadema’s commentary provides a useful example of how teachers can introduce concepts to their learners that are not included in commercially available textbooks by creating their own activities and adapting them for different types of learner.

Like Poklepovic’s and Lichterfeld’s commentaries mentioned above, Hera’s (2023) commentary on Rogerson-Revell’s (2008) study of international business meetings also references self-help guides written with a management audience in mind, (e.g., Meyer, 2014; Tomalin & Nicks, 2014), which allows her to extend her approach to training for meetings beyond the discourse and to also consider the differences in cultural approach that different participants may bring to the table. She also observes the importance of considering different types of meetings in developing an appropriate training course and reiterates the importance of including first language speakers of English (cf. Bhatia, 2022) in intercultural training courses focusing on meetings. As is the case with Poklepovic’s and Lichterfeld’s incorporation of coaching into their tasks, it seems plausible that the reference to management guides will be familiar territory for many of the participants in their courses; therefore, using these guides can likely help to establish credibility and create a context conducive to learning.

# 4. Future directions in research and practice

The commentaries in this Special Issue suggest a number of future directions for research and practice. In the research commentaries, one important observation is that it is not only linguistic research that can have pedagogical implications; other types of research, notably that concerned with intercultural communication and with how people initially engage with their profession and continue to do so over the course of their career, can also inform curriculum decisions and ways of facilitating business English learning. Future research could continue to explore these areas to complement our existing ideas. Not surprisingly, several of the commentaries, reflecting both research and practice, also talk about the changes in business discourse, and the emergence of different business genres, due to advances in technology such as Generative AI and the enduring use of online meetings and other forms of digital communication in the aftermath of COVID-19. This again would be a promising area to investigate. Several of the practitioners who contributed to this Special Issue drew on their own experience and other teaching ideas, in areas such as assessment, coaching and management guides on various aspects of organizational communication. They present convincing arguments as to why such ideas can be usefully incorporated into business English teaching and training materials, to include the development of skills in those other aspects of professional practice identified in previous studies that may run parallel to the development of language proficiency. These new perspectives indicate the importance of including practitioners in future debates on how best to integrate research and practice within pedagogical approaches to business English and professional practice.

The commentaries included here have shown once again that, although many studies on professional practice have been conducted in the past two decades within the paradigm of business English, studies that explore how our understanding of professional practice should influence pedagogical practice still remain sparse, as do specific practical pedagogical applications that are designed to reflect our research findings. In addition, the commentaries indicate that, although the research findings from some selected articles have been cited and used by researchers and practitioners in business English and beyond (e.g., Chan (2024), Flowerdew (2023) and Koester (2024) in this Special Issue), more initiatives are needed to incorporate research ideas into materials designed to teach business English that could then be published and therefore reach a wider audience, where business English is not considered in isolation, but as a crucial part of professional practice. We hope that this Special Issue confirms the value of considering both researcher and practitioner perspectives when exploring ways to apply research to pedagogy and that it will lead to similar conversations in their remit among academic journals in the ESP field, giving practitioners a voice to share research-informed pedagogical ideas (some good examples outside of the field of business English include the “Research to Practice Papers” in the Journal of English for Academic Purposes and the “Short Communication” section of the Journal of Second Language Writing that accepts reports describing new teaching approaches). ESP journals such as English for Specific Purposes could, for instance, introduce a practitioner section, to showcase researchinformed approaches to teaching without the need for an extended theoretical discussion. We also look forward to seeing more research on innovative pedagogical practices for teaching or training business English that have been developed collaboratively by researchers and practitioners.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to thank the Co-Editor of English for Specific Purposes at the time when this project started, Christine Feak, for supporting the idea of the Special Issue and for all her help while it was underway.

We would also like to thank all of the contributors for negotiating the unfamiliar territory that was presented to them in this Special Issue, the anonymous reviewers who helped to make the commentaries more rigorous and who suggested many additional useful ideas, and in particular, to Evan Frendo for his suggestion of many of the authors of the practitioner commentaries that appear here.

Thank you also to Elsevier for agreeing to make the Special Issue open access for some time, which has allowed us to reach more practitioners working outside of academic institutions, and many thanks to the journal manager, Vinaya Sundar, and her team, for all their help in navigating the submission and review process.

# References

Angouri, J. (2010). Using textbook and real-life data to teach turn taking in business meetings. In N. Harwood (Ed.), English language teaching materials: Theory and practice (pp. 373–394). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Angouri, J. (2018). Culture, discourse, and the workplace. Abingdon, Oxford: Routledge.   
Bao, D. (2013). Developing materials for speaking skills. In B. Tomlinson (Ed.), Developing materials for language teaching (2nd ed., pp. 407–428). Bloomsbury Academic.   
Bargiela-Chiappini, F., Nickerson, C., & Planken, B. (2013). Business discourse. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Bargiela-Chiappini, F., & Zhang, Z. (2013). Business English. In B. Paltridge, & S. Starfield (Eds.), The handbook of English for specific purposes (pp. 193–211). West Sussex: John Wiley & Sons.   
Basturkmen, H. (2022). Current trends in ESP research in the Asia Pacific region. World Englishes, 41(4), 512–522. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/weng.12601   
Bhatia, V. K. (2022). World Englishes for specific purposes: A multi-perspective view. World Englishes, 41(4), 584–595. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/weng.12602   
Bowles, H. (2006). Bridging the gap between conversation analysis and ESP: An applied study of the opening sequences of NS and NNS service telephone calls. English for Specific Purposes, 25(3), 332–357.   
Bremner, S. (2010). Collaborative writing: Bridging the gap between the textbook and the workplace. English for Specific Purposes, 29(2), 121–132.   
Bremner, S., & Costley, T. (2018). Bringing reality to the classroom: Exercises in intertextuality. English for Specific Purposes, 52, 1–12.   
Bruner, J. (1991). The narrative construction of reality. Critical Inquiry, 18(1), 1–21.   
Cameron, A.-F., Barki, H., Ortiz de Guinea, A., Coulon, T., & Moshki, H. (2018). Multicommunicating in meetings: Effects of locus, topic relatedness, and meeting medium. Management Communication Quarterly, 32(3), 303–336. http://dx.doi.org/10.1177/0893318918759437   
Chan, C. S. C. (2009). Forging a link between research and pedagogy: A holistic framework for evaluating business English materials. English for Specific Purposes, 28(2), 125–136. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2008.12.001   
Chan, C. S. C. (2017). Investigating a research-informed teaching idea: The use of transcripts of authentic workplace talk in the teaching of spoken business English. English for Specific Purposes Journal, 46, 72–89. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2016.12.002   
Chan, C. S. C. (2018). Proposing and illustrating a research-informed approach to curriculum development for specific topics in business English. English for Specific Purposes, 52, 27–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2018.07.001   
Chan, C. S. C. (2019). Long-term workplace communication needs of business professionals: Stories from Hong Kong senior executives and their implications for ESP and higher education. English for Specific Purposes, 56, 68–83. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2019.07.003   
Chan, C. S. C. (2021a). Helping university students discover their workplace communication needs: An eclectic and interdisciplinary approach to facilitating on-the-job learning of workplace communication. English for Specific Purposes, 64, 55–71. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2021.07.002   
Chan, C. S. C. (2021b). University graduates’ transition into the workplace: How they learn to use English for work and cope with language-related challenges. System, 100, Article 102530. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.system.2021.102530   
Chan, C. S. C. (2024). Strengthening the interface between research and pedagogy in business English and beyond. English for Specific Purposes, 74, 23–28. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.12.001   
Chan, C. S. C., & Frendo, E. (Eds.). (2014). New ways in teaching business English. Alexandria, VA: TESOL.   
Chew, S. K. (2005). An investigation of the English language skills used by new entrants in banks in Hong Kong. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 423–435.   
Collins COBUILD. (2004). Business vocabulary in practice. London: Collins.   
Davidson, P. (2023). A practitioner’s commentary on Z. Zhang (2013) Business English students learning to write for international business: What do international business practitioners have to say about their texts? English for Specific Purposes, 71, 197–199. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.05.004   
Deane, P., & Sparks, J. R. (2019). Scenario-based formative assessment of key practices in the English Language Arts. In H. Andrade, R. Bennett, & G. Cizek (Eds.), Handbook of formative assessment in the disciplines (pp. 68–96). Routledge.   
Dhawan, E. (2021). Digital Body Language: How to build trust and connection, No matter the distance. St. Martin’s Publishing Group.   
Evans, S. (2013). “Just wanna give you guys a bit of an update”: Insider perspectives on business presentations in Hong Kong. English for Specific Purposes, 32(4), 195–207.   
Flowerdew, J., & Wan, A. (2010). The linguistic and the contextual in applied genre analysis: The case of the company audit report. English for Specific Purposes, 29(2), 78–93. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2009.07.001   
Flowerdew, J. (2023). Commentary on Flowerdew, J., & Wan, A. (2010). The linguistic and the contextual in applied genre analysis: The case of the company audit report. English for Specific Purposes 29(2), 78–93, English for Specific Purposes, 71, 57–59. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.02.010   
Gimenez, J. (2014). Multi-communication and the business English class: Research meets pedagogy. English for Specific Purposes, 35, 1–16. http://dx.doi.org/ 10.1016/j.esp.2013.11.002   
Gimenez, J. (2023). Integrating multi-communication research and the business English class. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 87–89. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.esp.2023.02.008   
Glaser, J. E. (2016). Conversational intelligence: How great leaders build trust and get extraordinary results. Routledge.   
Handford, M., Lisboa, M., Koester, A., & Pitt, A. (2012). Business advantage: Upper-intermediate student’s book. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hera, O. (2023). Participation in global business meetings revisited. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 54–56. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.02.007   
Hewings, M., & Nickerson, C. (Eds.). (1999). Business English: Research into practice. London and New York: Longman.   
Ilie, C., Nickerson, C., & Planken, B. (2019). Teaching business discourse. Basingstoke: Palgrave Macmillan.   
Kankaanranta, A. (2023). Commentary on Louhiala-Salminen et al. (2005): Launching the notion of BELF. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 146–148. http://dx. doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.04.003   
Koester, A. (2002). The performance of speech acts in workplace conversations and the teaching of communicative functions. System, 30(2), 167–184. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0346-251X(02)00003-9   
Koester, A. (2004). The language of work. London & New York: Routledge.   
Koester, A. (2014). “We’d be prepared to do something, like if you say” hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations. English for Specific Purposes, 36, 35–46. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2014.03.005   
Koester, A. (2024). Hypothetical reported speech in business negotiations: A researcher commentary. English for Specific Purposes, 73, 156–158. http://dx.doi. org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.10.002   
Koester, A., Pitt, A., Handford, M., & Lisboa, M. (2012). Business advantage: Intermediate student’s book. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Leopold, L. K. (2023). A practitioner’s commentary on Stephen Evans’ “Just wanna give you guys a bit of an update”: Insider perspectives on business presentations in Hong Kong (2013). English for Specific Purposes, 71, 90–96. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.03.001   
Lichterfeld, K. (2024). A practitioner’s commentary on C. Chan (2019): Long-term workplace communication needs of business professionals. English for Specific Purposes, 74, 1–8. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.10.008   
Lisboa, M., & Handford, M. (2012). Business advantage: Advanced student’s book. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lockwood, J., & McCarthy, H. (2010). Contact US. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Louhiala-Salminen, L., Charles, M., & Kankaanranta, A. (2005). English as a lingua franca in Nordic corporate mergers: Two case companies. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 401–421.   
Margari, V. (2023). Multi-communication in the new normal. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 78–86. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.02.009   
Mascull, B. (2004). Advanced business vocabulary in use. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press   
Meyer, E. (2014). The Culture Map: Breaking though the invisible boundaries of global business. New York, NY: Public Affairs.   
Molinsky, A. (2023). Global dexterity. How to adapt your behaviour across cultures without losing yourself in the process. Retrieved 21 June 2023, from Harvard Business Review Press https://www.andymolinsky.com/10powerfulquestions/.   
Ngai, C. S. B., Singh, R. G., & Kwan, S. C. (2020). A comparative study of the linguistic manifestations of intertextuality in corporate leaders’ messages of global corporations in the US and China. English for Specific Purposes, 60, 65–84   
Nickerson, C. (forthcoming). English for specific purposes and English as a lingua franca. In S. Starfield & C. Hafner (Eds.) The handbook of English for specific purposes. Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell.   
Nickerson, C. (2005). English as a lingua franca in international business contexts. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 367–380. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j. esp.2005.02.001   
Nickerson, C., & Planken, B. (2016). Introducing business English. London and New York: Routledge.   
Planken, B. (2005). Managing rapport in lingua franca sales negotiations: A comparison of professional and aspiring negotiators. English for Specific Purposes, 24(4), 381–400.   
Planken, B. (2023). Commentary on Chan’s (2019) investigation of the communication needs of Hong Kong business professionals: Significance for the field of ESP and further implications for research and practice. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 51–53. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.02.011   
Poklepovic, D. (2023). A practitioner’s commentary on Louhiala-Salminen et al. (2005): Tackling BELF communication challenges in cross-border mergers and beyond. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 143–145. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.04.005   
Riddiford, N., & Newton, J. (2010). Workplace talk in action: An ESOL resource. Victoria University of Wellington.   
Rogerson Revell, P. (2023). Commentary on Rogerson-Revell, P. (2008). Participation and performance in international business meetings. English for Specific Purposes 27, 338–360, English for Specific Purposes, 71, 194–196. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.05.002   
Rogerson-Revell, P. (2008). Participation and performance international business meetings. English for Specific Purposes, 27(3), 338–360.   
Sato, M., & Loewen, S. (2022). The research–practice dialogue in second language learning and teaching: Past, present, and future. The Modern Language Journal, 106(3), 509–527. http://dx.doi.org/10.1111/modl.12791   
Saxon, P. J. (2023). A practitioner commentary: Flowerdew, J. and Wan, A. (2010). The linguistic and the contextual in applied genre analysis: The case of the company audit report. English for Specific Purposes 29, 78–93, English for Specific Purposes, 72, 1–3. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.05.005   
Schnurr, S. (2013). Exploring professional communication: Language i action. London & New York: Routledge.   
Simpson, A. (2016). Do the Cornelsen ESP Matters series textbooks meet the needs of ESP in Asia?. In The Joint International Conference of the 8th International Conference on ESP in Asia & the 3rd International Symposium on Innovative Teaching and Research in ESP (Vol. 1, pp. 66–71).   
Simpson, A. (2018). Assertiveness and sensitivity training through BELF material development. JALT OnCUE Journal, 11(2), 201–210.   
Simpson, A. (2024). A practitioner’s commentary on C. Chan (2009): "Forging a link between research and pedagogy: A holistic framework for evaluating business English materials. English for Specific Purposes, 74, 48–54. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.12.005   
Simpson, A., & Mork, C.-M. (2021). The development of a banking English seminar. Comparative Culture, 26, 15–36.   
St John, M. J. (1996). Business is booming: Business English in the 1990s. English for Specific Purposes, 15(1), 3–18.   
Subero-Sáenz, Á. (2023). A researcher’s commentary on Stephen Evans’ “Just wanna give you guys a bit of an update": Insider perspectives on business presentations in Hong Kong (2013). English for Specific Purposes, 71, 97–99. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.03.003   
Tadema, U. (2023). Exploiting hypothetical reported speech in the business English classroom. English for Specific Purposes, 72, 16–19. http://dx.doi.org/10. 1016/j.esp.2023.06.002   
Takino, M. (2020). Power in international business communication and linguistic competence: Analyzing the experiences of nonnative business people who use English as a business lingua franca (BELF). International Journal of Business Communication, 7(4), 517–544.   
Tomalin, B., & Nicks, M. (2014). World business cultures: A handbook (3rd ed.). London: Thorogood Publishing Ltd.   
Warren, M. (2013). Just spoke to ”: The types and directionality of intertextuality in professional discourse. English for Specific Purposes, 32(1), 12–24.   
Warren, M. (2016). Signalling intertextuality in business emails. English for Specific Purposes, 42, 26–37. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2015.11.001   
Warren, M. (2023). Researcher commentary on Warren (2013): The prevalence and forms of intertextuality. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 100–101. http:// dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.02.005   
Yeh, A. (2023). Intertextuality in business emails: An ESP Practitioner’s commentary on Warren’s research on intertextuality. English for Specific Purposes, 71, 139–142. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.esp.2023.04.001