# Advanced Cantonese ESL learners’ production of English speech sounds: Problems and strategies

Alice Y.W. Chan\*

Department of English, City University of Hong Kong, 83 Tat Chee Avenue, Kowloon, Hong Kong Received 17 August 2009; revised 30 October 2009; accepted 23 November 2009

# Abstract

This article discusses the production of English speech sounds by advanced Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong. A total of forty university students participated in the study, which included three speech production tasks investigating participants’ production of target English speech sounds in isolated words, minimal pairs and passages. The results of the study give confirmatory empirical evidence supporting previous literature on the pronunciation difficulties encountered by Hong Kong Cantonese ESL learners as well as the strategies they often use to overcome their pronunciation difficulties. It is suggested that speech training be included as an integral part of ESL curriculums for students of all levels, but for advanced learners of English, such programmes should be research-driven and prioritized.

$^ { © }$ 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Speech production; Second Language Acquisition; Cantonese ESL learners; Problems and strategies

# 1. Introduction

Most studies on second language phonology learning by Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong have focused on learners’ production of English speech sounds and have often attributed learner difficulties to the differences between the English and Cantonese phonological systems (e.g. Chan and Li, 2000; Jones, 1979). As far as the learning of English consonants is concerned, it has often been documented that English consonants non-existent in Cantonese, such as $/ \mathrm { \theta } / , / \mathrm { z } / , / \mathrm { r } / , / \mathrm { t } \int / , / \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } / .$ , are difficult for Cantonese ESL learners to produce. Sounds shared by both the English and Cantonese phonological systems, such as /f/, /s/, /w/ (for /q/, /z/, /r/ respectively), or Cantonese sounds thought to be similar to the target English sounds, such as /ts/ and /dz/ (for $/ \mathrm { t } \int / \ d t$ and $/ \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } /$ respectively), are often used as substitutes (e.g. Bolton and Kwok, 1990; Chan, 2006a, 2006b; Chan and Li, 2000; Hung, 2000; Kenworthy, 1987; Lo, 2005; Stibbard, 2004). Devoicing of English voiced obstruents, such as $/ z / , / \mathrm { v } /$ and $/ \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } /$ regardless of their positions in words, and especially of final English plosives, namely $ { \langle { \bf b } \rangle } ,  { \langle { \mathrm { d } } \rangle } ,  { \langle { \mathrm { g } } \rangle }$ , is also very common (Chan and Li, 2000). Most of the resultant devoiced sounds again resemble the corresponding voiceless sounds shared by both the English and Cantonese phonological systems, such as $/ \mathrm { s } / , / \mathrm { f } /$ and $/ \mathrm { p } /$ . Vocalization of final $/ \mathrm { l } / $ is another feature characteristic of Cantonese ESL learners’ English output, in that $/ \mathrm { l } / $ in final position is often pronounced with a vowel-like feature (Chan, 2006a; Hung, 2000). Confusion between initial $/ \mathrm { n } /$ and $/ \mathrm { l } / $ is also a prevalent problem. Although both sounds are shared by the English and Cantonese phonological systems, they are often neutralized in initial position in Cantonese (Chan and Li, 2000; Deterding et al., 2008; Wong and Setter, 2002), and Cantonese ESL learners tend to produce initial English $/ \mathrm { n } /$ with [l]. In consonance with earlier Second Language Acquisition (SLA) models such as the Contrastive Analysis Hypothesis (CAH) proposed by Lado (1957), which argues that target language forms that are different from the equivalent forms in the native language would be difficult to learn, and the Markedness Differential Hypothesis (MDH) proposed by Eckman (1977), which incorporates typological markedness in the prediction of learner difficulty, mother tongue interference is often regarded as the main source of difficulties and is often reduced to a formula somewhat like ‘‘more differences (between the native and target language) $=$ more difficulties (in the learning of the target sounds)’’, or ‘‘sounds non-existent in the native language $=$ sound difficult to produce’’ (see Appendix I for a comparison between English and Cantonese consonants).

As far as the learning of English vowels is concerned, the situation is more complicated. Akin to the scenario of consonant learning, substitution of a near sound in the native language for a target L2 sound is a common strategy used to cope with English sounds not found in the L1. For example, English $/ \mathrm { { z } } /$ is found to have often been replaced by a similar Cantonese vowel in production, namely $/ \mathrm { e } I$ (Sewell, 2009). Other than this, there are pairs of English long and short vowels, namely /i:/ and $/ \mathrm { { J } }$ , /u:/ and $/ \mathrm { { { u } } } /$ , and $/ { \mathfrak { I } } { : } I$ and $/ { \bf { n } } /$ , the length differences between which have often become indistinguishable in the speech of Cantonese ESL learners, so sometimes a long vowel is substituted for a short one, a short vowel for a long one, or a vowel sound somewhere in between the long and short vowels is produced for either case (Chan and Li, 2000). These problems in producing English vowels are again often explained in terms of the inventory gaps between the two languages, that the corresponding vowels in Cantonese are all short, namely $/ \mathrm { i } / \mathrm { , } / \mathrm { u } /$ and $/ { \supset } /$ respectively (see Appendix II for a comparison between Cantonese and English vowels).

Despite the rich documented evidence of Cantonese ESL learners’ pronunciation difficulties, many of the documented problems were only based on the authors’ observations rather than the findings of rigorous research (e.g. Chan and Li, 2000), and others were the results of research studies which focussed on only a few categories of sounds or implemented with a very small group of learners (e.g. Chan, 2006a,b; Lo, 2005; Peng and Setter, 2000; Stibbard, 2004; Wong and Setter, 2002). To the author’s knowledge, no recent research studies attempt to systematically analyze a wide range of production targets by a large group of learners (Deterding et al. (2008) may be an exception, but the sample size of 15 students was not large). The present research aimed to fill this gap.

# 2. Objectives

The main objective of the present study was to analyze advanced Hong Kong Cantonese ESL learners’ production of English speech sounds by collecting a large sample of contemporary empirical data. Special attention was paid to the sounds which have been documented as difficult for Cantonese ESL learners in the literature. The level of difficulty that these sounds presented to the participants, as well as the strategies that the participants used in tackling the sounds, was the main focus of the study.

# 3. Production targets

The production targets in the study included the English speech sounds which have often been documented in the literature as causing production difficulties or confusion to Cantonese ESL learners (Bolton and Kwok, 1990; Chan, 2006a,b; Chan and Li, 2000; Hung, 2000; Kenworthy, 1987; Stibbard, 2004), such as $/ \int / , / \Theta / , / \mathrm { z } / , / \mathrm { i } ; / , / \mathrm { I } /$ and $/ \mathrm { { z } } /$ (see Introduction). Including only ‘‘problematic’’ sounds in an L2 phonology research study, however, may not be illuminating enough, as there will be no evidence for contrast. Therefore, L2 speech sounds which are not at all problematic but which have often been documented as common substitute sounds were also included in the study to contrast with the more problematic ones. Examples of such sounds included $/ \mathrm { s } /$ (for contrasting with $/ \mathbf { z } /$ and $/ \int / \ d t$ , /f/ (for contrasting with /v/ and /q/), /w/ (for contrasting with $/ \mathrm { r / }$ ) and $/ \mathrm { d } /$ (for contrasting with $/ \eth /$ ).

Not all problematic speech sounds were included in the study though. The schwa $( / \mathsf { \circ } / )$ , for example, was excluded as no English mono-syllabic words (except weak forms of function words) contain the vowel as their peaks when spoken in isolation. $/ { _ { 3 } } /$ was excluded due to its defective distribution (very few English words begin or end with this consonant), and plosives were excluded because of Cantonese ESL learners’ usual production patterns: Initial plosives are not at all problematic yet final plosives are often unreleased, giving rise to an absence of articulatory differences (Chan and Li, 2000; Chan, 2006a).

The lateral $/ \mathrm { l } / $ was treated specially in this paper. This sound is well-known for having two discrete allophones in RP English: clear [l] with the front of the tongue raised, and dark [L] with the back of the tongue raised (Ladefoged, 2006; Roach, 2000; Sproat and Fujimura, 1993). In initial position, $/ \mathrm { l } / $ has often been regarded in the literature as an ‘‘easy’’ sound for Cantonese ESL learners to produce, so the sound in initial position was included in the study just to contrast with $/ \mathrm { r } /$ and $/ \mathrm { n } / .$ . However, in final position, dark [L] has often been documented as ‘‘difficult’’ for Cantonese ESL learners, so the sound was also included as a target sound when it appeared in final position. As a result, the consonants included in the study were $\begin{array} { r } { / f , s , \theta , \int , \mathrm { t } \int , \tilde { 0 } , d , \mathrm { v } , z , \mathrm { d } 3 , \mathrm { n } , \mathrm { \eta } , w , 1 , \mathrm { r } / . } \end{array}$ , and the target vowels were /i:, I, u:, U, o:,a, e, æ/ (The italicized sounds are substitute sounds just for contrast).

# 4. Participants

A total of forty Hong Kong ESL learners including twenty-nine females and eleven males participated in the study. All of them were native speakers of Cantonese and they all used their first language, Cantonese, for intra-ethnic communication. Their ages ranged from nineteen to forty-two at the time of the study.

The participants were all English majors studying at three local universities, including eight year 1 students, twenty-two year 2 students, and ten year 3 or postgraduate students. All of them started to learn English formally at primary school (at the age of six) or earlier. Twenty-six claimed to have received some form of phonetics training (such as taking a phonetics and phonology or pronunciation course), and the accent they learnt was Received Pronunciation (RP) English. Fourteen had not received any phonetics training before. In view of the number of years of English education received and the major of study being pursued, the whole group of participants could be regarded as advanced in English proficiency.

Having a greater number of female participants than male participants was virtually unavoidable, because in Hong Kong (and probably worldwide) female language majors significantly outnumber male ones. The reason for including two groups of advanced learners, one with phonetic training and the other without, was to obtain a more representative sample of advanced learners. No attempt was made to compare the performance of the learners from the two groups.

# 5. Data collection

The participants were asked to participate in three reading tasks in which their abilities to produce different English speech sounds were examined. Three reading tasks instead of one were used to ensure that a variety of reading styles be included in the study.

# 5.1. Task 1

Reading of isolated words: The purpose of this task was to elicit participants’ careful production of English speech sounds embedded in isolated words. They were given a list of 160 isolated words (120 words with the target consonants and 40 words with the target vowels) and asked to read the words one by one. In order that the participants were not distracted or intimidated by long words, only mono-syllabic or bi-syllabic words were included. For vowels, care was taken to ensure that the target sounds appeared in different phonological environments, and for consonants, care was taken to ensure that the target sounds appeared in both initial and final positions of the words unless otherwise prohibited by the phonotactics of the language.

# 5.2. Task 2

Reading of minimal pairs: The purpose of this task was to elicit participants’ careful production of sounds contrasted in minimal pairs. A paired word list of 89 English minimal pairs containing the target sounds (66 pairs contrasting the target consonants and 23 pairs contrasting the target vowels) were given to the participants, who read the words pair by pair. As with the previous task, only mono-syllabic or bi-syllabic minimal pairs were used, and the target sounds appeared in different phonological environments unless otherwise prohibited by the phonotactics of the language.

This minimal pair reading task supplemented the previous isolated word reading task by introducing an additional element of consciousness: a conscious effort to differentiate between similar but different English speech sounds. With the inclusion of this task, the participants’ English pronunciation abilities would be better reflected. In these two word reading tasks, words with ‘‘difficult’’ consonants non-existent in Cantonese, such as ‘‘zip’’ and ‘‘rise’’, were of course included, but words which are in a minimal pair relationship and which contain consonants existent in both English and Cantonese, such as ‘‘sip’’ and ‘‘wise’’, were also included for contrasting purposes (see Appendix III and Appendix IV for a list of isolated words and minimal pairs used in the two tasks).1

# 5.3. Task 3

Reading in context: The purpose of this task was to elicit participants’ production of English speech sounds in a careful, but contextualized reading style. The participants were asked to read three passages of about 362 words, 255 words and 275 words respectively. The passages were adapted from two local English textbooks (namely Active English Today and Integrated Primary English 6) for primary 6 students. They were chosen because they were very simple texts with simple storylines and contained no difficult vocabulary items for university students, so the participants would not be distracted by unfamiliar words or concepts in the course of their reading. The length of the passages was so decided in order to sustain the participants’ interest and attention. Three different short passages instead of one long passage were chosen so that a variety of topics, and thus a variety of words, could be included. Some adaptations were made to the passages so as to include as many target (problematic) sounds as possible.

Because the main focus of the study was on the pronunciation of ‘‘problematic’’ sounds by Cantonese ESL learners, the substitute sounds which were mainly used for contrast, namely /d/, /f/, /s/, /w/, and initial $/ \mathrm { l } /$ were not analyzed in this task. This may be a problem, as the accuracy rates of the productions of these sounds may not be representative enough. However, given that these sounds tend to create much fewer problems to Cantonese ESL learners than others, including them in Task 1 and Task 2, which required careful reading of isolated words, may suffice for the purpose of the study.

# 6. Pronunciation norm

RP was taken as the norm in the accuracy judgment process, as this accent is the one most widely taught in local schools, universities inclusive. The use of this accent as the norm may be argued as inappropriate to the Hong Kong context, as RP English is not widely used in Hong Kong and the majority of local ESL speakers, including English teachers, typically speak English with an identifiable Hong Kong accent rather than conforming to a British reference norm. However, as Deterding et al. (2008) point out, Hong Kong English is only in the process of developing its own identity and Hong Kong still looks elsewhere for its norms. Regardless of which accent is the dominant one in the Hong Kong ESL speaking community, a standard model has to be adopted in a pronunciation study like the present one. Given that RP English is one of the most widely accepted models in pronunciation teaching and learning in Hong Kong, that many ESL learners and ESL users in the region have a desire to speak ‘‘good English’’ by approximating the RP norm, and that RP was the accent which the participants with phonetics training had learnt, this accent was chosen as the norm for accuracy judgment.

# 7. Data analysis

The participants’ performance in each task was recorded using a high-quality mini-disk recorder and was played to two raters for accuracy judgment. All the documented features relevant to the accurate articulation of the target sounds, including the manner of articulation, the place of articulation, and the state of the glottis (i.e. voiced or voiceless) (Roach, 2000) for consonants, and the quality of the vowels, were taken into account, but the participants’ performance in irrelevant areas, such as their pronunciation of the vowels preceding the target consonants or their pronunciation of the consonants surrounding the target vowels, were ignored. Productions which conformed to the norm were regarded accurate, whereas those which deviated from the norm were regarded incorrect. The percentages of correct productions of a target L2 sound were computed by dividing the total number of correct productions by the total number of tokens. For sounds which were incorrectly produced, the substitute sounds were also recorded. The frequency with which a particular target sound was mispronounced as a certain substitute sound was calculated by dividing the total number of tokens of a particular substitution by the total number of inaccurate productions for that target sound.

The transcriptions of the two raters were compared for consistency and reliability. Where the two raters’ judgment diverged, the raters listened to the recordings again with a third rater to make a second judgment and the majority judgment was taken.

It was decided that only human transcription, not instrumental analysis, of the recordings sufficed for the study, because the most common strategies which Cantonese students in Hong Kong use to tackle ‘‘difficult’’ sounds, namely deletion and substitution by a near sound either in the native language or in the target language (Chan and Li, 2000), can be easily identified by an experienced researcher without the help of any instruments.

# 8. Results

A total of 24,439 tokens of target consonants and 22,235 tokens of target consonants in the three production tasks were collected and analyzed. In the following sections, the results of the participants’ overall performance on consonants and the strategies they used to tackle problematic consonants will be discussed. This will be followed by a discussion of their performance on vowels and the strategies used. Example words will be given wherever necessary to illustrate the contexts in which a certain target sound was replaced by a substitute sound, except for substitutions which are predominant, but substitute sounds used for one or two instances with an overall percentage of lower than $2 \%$ will not be included, as they are not representative and may only represent a slip of the tongue.

Although three different tasks were used in the study to introduce a variety of reading contexts, no attempt was made to compare the participants’ performance across the three tasks.

# 8.1. Participants’ production of English consonants

The participants’ production of voiceless obstruents was good, with over $90 \%$ of accuracy for most cases (e.g. $9 4 . 8 \%$ for /!/, $9 7 . 6 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { s } /$ , $9 8 . 6 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { f } /$ , and $9 9 . 0 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { t } \int / )$ . The voiceless obstruent with lowest score was $/ \theta /$ , which received an accuracy rate of only $7 1 . 9 \%$ . Their production of voiced obstruents was much poorer, with some accuracy rates as low as $15 \%$ (e.g. $3 . 7 \%$ for $/ \eth /$ , $7 . 8 \%$ for $/ \mathbf { z } / .$ , $1 1 . 1 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } /$ , $1 5 . 3 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { v } / .$ , and $70 \%$ for $/ \mathrm { d } /$ ).

The participants’ production of sonorant consonants was on average better than that of obstruents. Overall accuracy rates were largely over $80 \%$ . The only exception was $/ \mathrm { l } / $ in final position.2 The accuracy rate was only about $1 3 . 1 \%$ . /s/ was not as accurately produced as $/ \mathrm { n } /$ (accuracy rates $= 8 4 . 1 \%$ and $9 5 . 7 \%$ respectively). The accuracy rate for $/ \mathrm { r } /$ was moderately high $( 8 7 . 5 \% )$ and very high for /w/ $( 9 5 . 6 \% )$ and initial $/ 1 / \left( 9 8 \% \right)$ (see Table 1 for a summary of the accuracy rates).

# 8.2. Strategies in overcoming problematic consonants

/f/ $3 3 . 3 \%$ of mispronounced /f/ were pronounced as the voiced [v], and the rest as [q]. Examples of the former included   
words such as ‘‘fox’’ and ‘‘few’’, whereas examples of the latter included words such as ‘‘first’’, ‘‘few’’ and ‘‘roof’’. /v/ $90 \%$ of the mispronounced instances were pronounced as the voiceless [f], and $9 \%$ as the approximant [w].   
Examples of the former included words such as ‘‘vine’’, ‘‘vain’’ and ‘‘leave’’, whereas examples of the latter included   
words such as ‘‘veil’’ and ‘‘vent’’. /q/ $9 7 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \theta /$ were pronounced with [f] replacing $/ \theta / .$ . Examples of such words included   
‘‘thought’’ and ‘‘thin’’, where $/ \theta /$ is in initial position, and also ‘‘death’’ and ‘‘Ruth’’, where $/ \theta /$ is in final position.

Table 1 Correct production of English consonants by the participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Consonants</td><td colspan="7">Accuracy rates</td></tr><tr><td rowspan="2">Task 1 (%)</td><td rowspan="2">Task 2 (%)</td><td colspan="4">Task 3</td><td rowspan="2">All tasks (%)</td></tr><tr><td>Passage 1</td><td>Passage 2</td><td> Passage 3</td><td>Overall</td></tr><tr><td>f</td><td>98.0</td><td>99.1</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>98.6</td></tr><tr><td>0</td><td>77</td><td>70.5</td><td>64.2%</td><td>73.8%</td><td>65.8%</td><td>70.1%</td><td>71.9</td></tr><tr><td>s.</td><td>97.5</td><td>97.7</td><td> Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>97.6</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>99</td><td>98.5</td><td>92.5%</td><td>90%</td><td>94.4%</td><td>92.8%</td><td>94.8</td></tr><tr><td>ts</td><td>98.5</td><td>98.8</td><td>99.7%</td><td>96.2%</td><td>99.3%</td><td>99.3%</td><td>99.0</td></tr><tr><td>d</td><td>60</td><td>80</td><td> Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>70</td></tr><tr><td>v</td><td>30.3</td><td>32.6</td><td>2.3%</td><td>9.4%</td><td>5.6%</td><td>5.7%</td><td>15.3</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>16.5</td><td>18</td><td>1.1%</td><td>2.1%</td><td>4.7%</td><td>2.7%</td><td>3.7</td></tr><tr><td>z</td><td>35</td><td>41.3</td><td>1.3%</td><td>1.6%</td><td>1.8%</td><td>1.5%</td><td>7.8</td></tr><tr><td>d3</td><td>21.5</td><td>32.5</td><td>3.5%</td><td>2.8%</td><td>4.5%</td><td>3.7%</td><td>11.1</td></tr><tr><td>n</td><td>95.5</td><td>90.5</td><td>97.5%</td><td>97.5%</td><td>99.1%</td><td>98.5%</td><td>95.7</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>72.5</td><td>61.5</td><td>87.8%</td><td>90.0%</td><td>92.2%</td><td>90.5%</td><td>84.1</td></tr><tr><td>r</td><td>90.5</td><td>89.8</td><td>86.7%</td><td>79.2%</td><td>88.0%</td><td>85.2%</td><td>87.5</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>97.2</td><td>94.3</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>95.6</td></tr><tr><td>1 (initial)</td><td>98.1</td><td>97.8</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>Not analyzed</td><td>98.0</td></tr><tr><td>1 (final)</td><td>15</td><td>16.6</td><td>3.3%</td><td>6.1%</td><td>1.0%</td><td>3.4%</td><td>13.1</td></tr></table></body></html>

/ð/

$82 \%$ of mispronounced $/ \eth /$ were pronounced as [d], $1 4 . 7 \%$ as [q], and $1 . 5 \%$ as [f]. Examples of substitutions of [d] for $/ \eth /$ included function words such as ‘‘they’’ and this’’, whereas examples of substitutions of [q] or [f] for /ð/ included words such as ‘‘bathe’’ and ‘‘thy’’.

/d/

$9 4 . 5 \%$ of mispronounced $/ \mathrm { d } /$ were pronounced as [t], and $3 . 3 \%$ were omitted. Examples of words for both categories included words with final $/ \mathrm { d } /$ , such as ‘‘add’’ and ‘‘bayed’’. /!/ $9 8 . 5 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \int I$ were pronounced as [s]. /s/ $6 8 . 4 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { s } /$ was pronounced as $[ \int ]$ , while the rest were pronounced as [z]. Examples of the former included words such as ‘‘soot’’ and ‘‘cell’’, whereas examples of the latter included words such as ‘‘same’’ and ‘‘said’’. /z/ $98 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathbf { z } /$ were devoiced as [s], regardless of whether $/ \mathbf { z } /$ appeared in initial (e.g. in ‘‘zip’’, ‘‘zoo’’) or in final position (e.g. in ‘‘rise’’). $/ \mathrm { t } \int / \ d t$ $9 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { t } \int /$ were pronounced as $[ \int ]$ with [t] omitted, such as in ‘‘larch’’, and $91 \%$ were pronounced as [ts] without lip-rounding. /dZ/ $9 2 . 4 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } /$ were pronounced as $[ \mathfrak { t } \int ]$ and the others as Cantonese [ts], which is similar to $/ \mathrm { t } \int /$ except for lip-rounding. $/ \mathrm { n } /$ $6 2 . 3 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { n } /$ were pronounced as [l], such as in ‘‘nine’’ and ‘‘net’’, whereas $3 8 . 7 \%$ were pronounced as [s], such as in ‘‘Don’’. $/ \mathfrak { p } /$ $26 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathfrak { h } /$ were pronounced with release, such as in ‘‘king’’ and ‘‘long’’, and the rest were pronounced as [n], such as in ‘‘hang’’ and ‘‘tongue’’. /w/ $2 8 . 6 \%$ of the mispronounced /w/ were pronounced as [v], such as in ‘‘wet’’, $2 2 . 9 \%$ as [f], such as in ‘‘wet’’, and the rest as [r], such as in ‘‘weed’’.

$/ \mathrm { r } /$   
$8 3 . 3 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { r } /$ were pronounced as [w], as in ‘‘rise’’, and the rest as [l], as in ‘‘road’. /l/

Nearly all mispronounced instances of $/ \mathrm { l } / $ are associated with the sound in final position (dark /l/) and all the mispronounced instances were pronounced with some sort of vocalization. Examples of words included ‘‘bill’’, ‘‘kill’’ and ‘‘bell’’.

# 8.3. Participants’ production of English vowels

The participants’ production of vowels on the whole was not as good as their performance on voiceless obstruents and sonorant consonants but better than their performance on voiced obstruents. $/ \mathrm { { z } } /$ was the sound most inaccurately produced (accuracy rate $= 1 6 . 4 \%$ ). $/ \mathrm { { I } } /$ and $/ \mathrm { e } /$ created least problems. The accuracy rates were about $9 7 . 1 \%$ and $9 6 . 0 \%$ respectively. Short vowels were on the whole more accurately produced than long vowels. The same pattern was found for all the short and long vowel pairs under investigation. The biggest difference was seen in $/ \mathrm { { i } } { \cdot } /$ and $/ \mathrm { { J } } ^ { \prime }$ , with accuracy rates of $5 7 . 5 \%$ and $9 7 . 1 \%$ respectively. The difference between $/ \mathrm { u } \mathrm { : } /$ and $/ \mathrm { { { u } } } /$ was the smallest, with accuracy rates of $6 4 . 8 \%$ and $7 5 . 2 \%$ respectively (see Table 2 for a summary of the accuracy rates).

# 8.4. Strategies in overcoming problematic vowels

/i:/ $9 7 . 8 \%$ of the mispronounced /i:/ were mispronounced as a shortened vowel similar to [I]. $/ \mathrm { { I } } /$ $9 7 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { { J } }$ were pronounced as a lengthened vowel similar to [i:]. $/ \mathrm { u } \mathrm { : } I$ $9 5 . 3 \%$ of the mispronounced /u:/ were shortened to a vowel similar to [U]. /U/ $9 7 . 5 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { { { u } } } /$ were lengthened to a vowel similar to [u:]. $/ { \mathfrak { I } } { : } I$ $9 4 . 8 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ { \ o }$ :/were pronounced as a shortened vowel similar to [a]. $/ { \bf { v } } /$ $6 0 . 3 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ { \bf { v } } /$ were pronounced as a lengthened vowel similar to [o:], yet other substitute sounds   
were also found. $2 9 . 8 \%$ were pronounced as [A:], such as in ‘‘pond’’, ‘‘Tom’’ and ‘‘gone’’. /e/ $3 0 . 7 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { e } I$ were pronounced as [æ], such as in ‘‘set’’ and ‘‘guess’’, and $5 0 . 4 \%$ as [I], such as in   
‘‘bet’’ and ‘‘wreck’’. /æ/ $9 7 . 7 \%$ of the mispronounced $/ \mathrm { { a } } /$ were pronounced as [e].

Table 2 Correct production of English vowels by the participants.   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="3">Vowels</td><td colspan="7">Accuracy rates</td></tr><tr><td>Task 1 (%)</td><td>Task 2 (%)</td><td colspan="3">Task 3</td><td></td><td>All tasks (%)</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>Passage 1 (%)</td><td>Passage 2 (%)</td><td>Passage 3 (%)</td><td>Overall (%)</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>i:</td><td>56.3</td><td>79.2</td><td>48.7</td><td>37.1</td><td>76.0</td><td>53.3</td><td>57.5</td></tr><tr><td>1</td><td>77.5</td><td>92.1</td><td>99.1</td><td>97.9</td><td>96.6</td><td>97.9</td><td>97.1</td></tr><tr><td>u:</td><td>55.5</td><td>65.9</td><td>68.9</td><td>84.5</td><td>57.4</td><td>68.2</td><td>64.8</td></tr><tr><td>U</td><td>52</td><td>57.9</td><td>100</td><td>81</td><td>98.7</td><td>92.3</td><td>75.2</td></tr><tr><td>5:</td><td>56.5</td><td>60.5</td><td>60.5</td><td>31.1</td><td>70.6</td><td>55.0</td><td>56.0</td></tr><tr><td>D</td><td>65</td><td>78</td><td>97.8</td><td>88.2</td><td>99.4</td><td>95.0</td><td>91.3</td></tr><tr><td>e</td><td>82</td><td>91.7</td><td>96.3</td><td>98.8</td><td>97.9</td><td>97.3</td><td>96.0</td></tr><tr><td>x</td><td>22</td><td>21.3</td><td>10.6</td><td>24.6</td><td>26.8</td><td>13.9</td><td>16.4</td></tr></table></body></html>

# 9. Discussion

It can be seen from the results of the present study that advanced Cantonese ESL learners do encounter some difficulties in their production of English speech sounds, and the sounds which cause difficulties, together with the strategies used in tackling those sounds, are largely in line with documented evidence in the literature. In the following sections, some potential reasons for the difficulties will be explored. The effects of mother tongue interference on the participants’ learning of English speech sounds will also be discussed with reference to existing second language acquisition or speech learning theories where possible.

# 9.1. Consonants

As far as consonants are concerned, English consonants non-existent in the learners’ mother tongue (e.g. $I z / , / \mathrm { v } / , / \theta /$ , $/ \mathrm { d } _ { 3 } / )$ tend to pose many more difficulties than those shared by both the English and Cantonese phonological systems (e.g. /s/, /f/, /w/). Devoicing of voiced consonants and substitution of a ‘‘near’’ sound for a target sound are by far the most popular strategies. The devoiced sounds or the substitute sounds used are often the sounds shared by both the English and Cantonese phonological systems (e.g. $/ \mathrm { s } /$ for $/ \mathbf { z } /$ , /f/ for $/ \mathrm { v } /$ and $/ \mathrm { { 0 } / \mathrm { { , } / \mathrm { { w } / \mathrm { { f o r } / \mathrm { { r } / \mathrm { { \Omega } } } } } } }$ , or those only found in their L1 (e.g. /ts/ for $/ \mathrm { t } \int / )$ . The formula posited in the Introduction regarding the positive correlation between native and target language differences and learning difficulties seems to be largely applicable to the learning of English consonants by Hong Kong Cantonese ESL learners.

However, mother tongue interference may not be an absolute contributing factor for production difficulties. Some English consonants non-existent in Cantonese, such as $\displaystyle { \big / } \mathrm { t } { \int } / .$ , do not pose difficulties that are worthy of attention. Others, such as $/ \int I$ and $/ \mathrm { r } /$ , do create certain difficulties, but the problems are not particularly acute. Given that the learners are all advanced learners, such deviations from documented evidence may be explained by their higher level of proficiency and long exposure (often over 13 years) to the target language. The L2 sounds which indeed pose serious difficulties to the participants are universally difficult. /q/ and /ð/, for example, have been found in the literature as very difficult for many ESL learners in different parts of the world (Deterding and Kirkpatrick, 2006), and their exceptionally rare occurrence in the world’s languages (Maddieson, 1984) has added to the difficulty. Devoicing of final consonants is a very common phenomenon encountered by many ESL learners whose native language does not show voicing contrasts (Eckman, 1981; Edge, 1991; Major and Faudree, 1996), not just Chinese. Vocalization of final $/ \mathrm { l } / $ is common even in the native circle, especially in casual speech. This feature has even been described in Deterding (2005) as one of the two most prominent features of Estuary English, ‘‘a variety of speech that has become widespread far beyond its origins near London and along the estuary of the River Thames’’ (Deterding, 2005: 426; Przedlacka, 2002) and a style of pronunciation somewhere between RP and Cockney (Rosewarne, 1994). It is thus not surprising to find that advanced Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong do not pronounce these sounds which conform to the RP norms.

# 9.2. Vowels

With regard to vowels, previous documented evidence is also confirmed. /e/ is often used to substitute for $/ \mathrm { { a } } /$ , and the long and short vowel pairs (e.g. /i:/ and $/ \mathrm { { I } } / $ ) are often indistinguishable in speech. The substitute sound used for a short vowel is most commonly the corresponding long vowel in the same vowel pair, and vice versa.

The reciprocal or two-way substitutions between long and short vowel pairs can be seen as manifestations of neutralization, in the sense that the corresponding long (e.g. /i:/) and short vowels (e.g. /I/) in a vowel pair $( \mathrm { e . g . / i \mathrm { : , } U ) }$ are neutralized. It is also worth noting that although Cantonese does not have long and short vowel phonemes comparable to English /i:, I, o:, a, u:, U/, the Cantonese short vowels in question, $\begin{array} { r } { / \dot { 1 } , ~ \mathrm { \textmu } , ~ { \textsigma } ^ { \prime } \dot { { \mathrm { { s } } } } ^ { \prime } } \end{array}$ , all have long and short allophones realized in different contexts. For example, the two allophones of the Cantonese high front vowel /i/ are [i:], which occurs before labials and alveolars such as $/ \mathrm { m } / , / \mathrm { p } / , / \mathrm { n } /$ , or $/ \mathrm { t } / $ (e.g. in words such as ‘‘ ’’ /dzim/ (sharp)); and [I], which occurs before velars such as $/ \mathfrak { p } /$ or $/ \mathrm { k } I$ (e.g. in words such as ‘‘ ’’ /sik/ (eat)). The two allophones of Cantonese $/ \mathrm { u } /$ are [u:] and [U], which occur before alveolars such as $/ \mathrm { n } /$ and $/ \mathrm { t } /$ (e.g. in words such as ‘‘ ’’ /bun/ (fat)), and before velars such as $/ \mathfrak { p } /$ and $/ \mathrm { k } I$ respectively (e.g. in words such as ‘‘ ’’ /suk/ (uncle)) (Bauer and Benedict, 1997). Phonemically Cantonese only has short vowels similar to the short vowels of the three English long and short vowel pairs under investigation, but phonetically the long vowels surface as allophones of the short vowels in different phonological environments, so in real productions Cantonese short vowels are sometimes long and sometimes short, and the long realizations can be as long as the corresponding English long vowels. Durational distinctions between English long and short vowel phonemes, in effect, surface in Cantonese as allophonic variations in constrained environments. The participants’ overall better production of English short vowels than English long vowels may be explained by the phonemic inventory differences between the two languages, but their neutralization of the corresponding long and short vowel pairs may be explained by the allophonic feature of the Cantonese short vowels.

Rather than explaining the participants’ performance using the ‘‘differences resulting in difficulties’’ formula posited in the Introduction, it might be more appropriate to account for the observations with reference to the Speech Learning Model (SLM) proposed by Flege (1995). The SLM argues that the similarities between the native and target languages, rather than the differences, have an adverse effect on second language learning. The greater the perceived phonetic dissimilarity between an L2 sound and the closest L1 sound, the more likely it is that phonetic differences between the sounds will be discerned. If bilinguals can discern some of the phonetic differences between the L1 and L2 sounds, a new phonetic category can be established for an L2 sound. The production of that L2 sound eventually corresponds to the properties represented in its phonetic category (Flege, 1995:239). As mentioned above, a number of Cantonese short vowels have long and short allophones realized in different contexts. It may be plausible to suggest that the L2 long and short vowels (e.g. /i:/ and $/ \mathrm { I } / $ ) are so ‘‘similar’’ to the allophones of the corresponding L1 vowels (e.g. /i/) that the learners cannot discriminate between the L2 vowel phonemes, so they could not establish a new phonetic category for either of the L2 vowels and tend to neutralize them in production. In a similar fashion, English /æ/ may also be regarded so similar to Cantonese /e/ (both being front, unrounded vowels with a difference basically in the tongue height) that a new phonetic category could not be established for English $/ \mathrm { { a } } /$ , resulting in production difficulty and the observed substitution pattern. With the existing pool of data, no reliable conclusions can be arrived at about the validity of the claims of the SLM for second language speech production by Cantonese ESL learners. More research is needed to ascertain the relationship between L1 L2 similarities and speech production.

# 9.3. Other observations

The findings of the study also show that English consonants which are shared by the Cantonese phonemic inventory and which have seldom been documented as causing pronunciation problems for Cantonese ESL learners are also sometimes mispronounced, and the substitute sounds are interestingly those L2 sounds which have often been documented as difficult. Examples of the mispronounced ‘‘easy’’ consonants include $/ \mathrm { s } /$ and /w/ (e.g. in ‘‘soot’’ ‘‘same’’ and ‘‘weed’’), and the ‘‘difficult’’ substitute sounds include $I [ I ,  I \mathbf { z } / ]$ , and $/ \mathrm { r } /$ (e.g. $[ \int \mathrm { { \boldsymbol { \omega } } } \mathbf { u } ]$ , [zeIm], and [ri:d] for ‘‘soot’’, ‘‘same’’ and ‘‘weed’’). Although such unexpected mispronunciations or substitutions are observed, they do not seem to be frequent enough to form systematic patterns. Instead, they can be regarded as occasional slips of the tongue, or even research-induced hyper-corrections: Because the design of the study induced careful pronunciations of ‘‘difficult sounds’’, such as $/ \mathrm { r } /$ and $/ \mathbf { z } /$ , some learners were unconsciously induced to produce such sounds in incorrect contexts.

# 10. Pedagogical implications

In view of the findings that a number of English speech sounds pose difficulties to even advanced Cantonese ESL learners who have been exposed to the language for a long period of time, it is suggested that speech training be included as an integral part of the ESL curriculums for students of all levels, advanced levels inclusive.

For advanced learners, it is important that a pronunciation training programme be research-driven. ESL teachers should without doubt be well-versed in previous and current research findings regarding L2 phonology acquisition, but because not all English sounds are difficult for advanced Cantonese ESL learners and not all difficulties are equally acute, teachers should also diagnose their students’ pronunciation problems to uncover the prevalent problems of their own students and to identify any deviations from the research findings.

Teachers of advanced ESL learners are also advised to be selective and prioritize teaching items based on the research findings and their own diagnosis. Spending excessive amounts of time on ‘‘problems’’ which are not problematic to their learners is counter-productive, as students will be de-motivated to be engaged in the remedial learning activities. Individualized programmes which target specific problems of individual learners or small groups of learners are preferable to general programmes targeting a large class.

Speech sounds the mispronunciations of which show a systematic pattern should also receive prior attention. Devoicing of voiced obstruents is a good example. Given that devoicing is a common strategy used by advanced Cantonese ESL learners in dealing with voiced obstruents regardless of task requirements, sound categories and positions of sounds, it is cost-effective to give priority to such systematic patterns and to design teaching activities in the form of general remedial strategies targeting a cluster of sounds rather than individual sounds. It is also fruitful to encourage learners themselves to generalize the commonalities in their own mispronunciation habits before they are engaged in remedial learning.

# 11. Conclusion

In this article, I have reported on the results of a research study which investigated the production of English speech sounds by advanced Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong with specific focus on the strategies that learners use in tackling English speech sounds. It was found that although the students have been exposed to the target language for at least 13 years, their speech patterns are largely in line with documented problems in the literature. Speech training is, thus, an area of learning which should not be ignored even in the tertiary sector. Tertiary ESL teachers are advised to alert students’ conscious attention to their own speech habits and mispronunciations and give remedial training wherever possible.

# Acknowledgements

The work described in this article was fully supported by a competitive earmarked research grant from the Research Grants Council of the Hong Kong Special Administrative Region, China [Project No.: CityU 1455/05H]. The support of the Council is acknowledged.

Appendix I. The English (RP) and Cantonese Consonantal Systems   

<html><body><table><tr><td>P.o.A.*</td><td colspan="2">Bilabial</td><td colspan="2">Labio-dental</td><td colspan="2">Dental</td><td colspan="2">Alveolar</td><td colspan="2">Palatal-(Post) Alveolar</td><td colspan="2">Palatal Velar</td><td colspan="2">Labio-Velar</td><td colspan="2">Glottal</td><td colspan="2"></td></tr><tr><td>M.o.A</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>d</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>k</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>p</td><td>b</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>t</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>g</td><td></td><td>g&quot;</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Plosives/Stops c</td><td>p</td><td>b</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>t</td><td>d</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>k</td><td>g</td><td>k&quot;</td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td><td>f</td><td>v</td><td></td><td></td><td>s</td><td>z</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>h</td></tr><tr><td>Fricatives</td><td></td><td></td><td>f</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>s</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>h</td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>tj</td><td></td><td>d3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Affricates c</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>ts</td><td>dz</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>m</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>n</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Nasals</td><td>m</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>n</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Lateral</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>c</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>E</td><td>w</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>j</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Approximants c</td><td>w</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td>1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr></table></body></html>

\* P.O.A.: Place of Articulation. M.O.A.: Manner of Articulation.

Appendix II. The English (RP) and Cantonese Vowel Systems   

<html><body><table><tr><td>English short vowels (7)</td><td>/1, e, a, U, D, A, a/</td></tr><tr><td>Cantonese short vowels (7)</td><td>/i, e, y, u, ?, ce, a/</td></tr><tr><td>English long vowels (5)</td><td>/it, u:t, :, a:, 3:/</td></tr><tr><td>Cantonese long vowel (1)</td><td>/a:</td></tr><tr><td>English diphthongs (8)</td><td>/1e, e?, ug, eI, al, gi, au, du!.</td></tr><tr><td>Cantonese diphthongs (10)</td><td>/ei, ai, a:i, i, ui, au, a.u, iu, ou, cey!</td></tr></table></body></html>

(Chan and Li, 2000)

Appendix III. List of Isolated Words Used in Task 1   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Set 1</td><td>Sing</td><td>Hill</td><td>Teen</td><td>Bit</td><td>Peak</td><td>Sick</td><td>King</td><td>Deal</td><td>Pin</td><td>Wheat</td></tr><tr><td>Set 2</td><td>Moon</td><td>Food</td><td>Wool</td><td>Good</td><td>Cool</td><td>Full</td><td>Cook</td><td>Luke</td><td>Put</td><td>Shoot</td></tr><tr><td>Set 3</td><td>Stock</td><td>Walk</td><td>Dawn</td><td>Pop</td><td>Bought</td><td>Tom</td><td>Gone</td><td>Mall</td><td>Pond</td><td>Pawed</td></tr><tr><td>Set 4</td><td>Bag</td><td>Head</td><td> Jack</td><td>Leg</td><td>Pen</td><td>Gas</td><td>Check</td><td>Mat</td><td>Bet</td><td>Ban</td></tr><tr><td>Set 5</td><td>Bill</td><td>Pew</td><td>Kill</td><td>Pill</td><td>Mill</td><td>Mew</td><td>New</td><td>Dill</td><td>Dew</td><td>Queue</td></tr><tr><td>Set 6</td><td>Far</td><td>Full</td><td>Vine</td><td>Vain</td><td>Fox</td><td>Van</td><td>Few</td><td>Fat</td><td>Love</td><td>Leave</td></tr><tr><td>Set 7</td><td>Roof</td><td>Thin</td><td>Deaf</td><td>Fake</td><td>Death</td><td>Ruth</td><td>Fought</td><td>Fin</td><td>Thick</td><td>Thought</td></tr><tr><td>Set 8</td><td>Add</td><td>They</td><td>Bayed</td><td>There</td><td>Day</td><td>That</td><td>Dough</td><td>Dare</td><td>Bathe</td><td>Though</td></tr><tr><td>Set 9</td><td>Zip</td><td>Seal</td><td>Zoo</td><td>Soot</td><td>Sad</td><td>Zap.</td><td>Rise</td><td>Buzz</td><td>Bus</td><td>Phase</td></tr><tr><td>Set 10</td><td>Choke</td><td>Chase</td><td> Jill</td><td>Batch</td><td> Jaw</td><td>Choice</td><td>Age</td><td> June</td><td> Jade</td><td>Choose</td></tr><tr><td>Set 11</td><td>Hen</td><td>On</td><td>Wing</td><td>Ban</td><td>Hang</td><td>In</td><td>King</td><td>Fun</td><td>Long</td><td>Tongue</td></tr><tr><td>Set 12</td><td>She</td><td>Sell</td><td>Ash</td><td>Sock</td><td>Push</td><td>Show</td><td>Shy</td><td>Sip</td><td>Sign</td><td> Soap</td></tr><tr><td>Set 13</td><td>We</td><td>Wear</td><td>Vine</td><td>Went</td><td>Vote</td><td>Wet </td><td>v</td><td>Why</td><td>Van</td><td>Vein</td></tr><tr><td>Set 14</td><td>Late</td><td>Let.</td><td>Read</td><td>Like</td><td>Rock</td><td>Load</td><td>Rule</td><td>Lap</td><td>Road</td><td>Right</td></tr><tr><td>Set 15</td><td>Way</td><td>Red</td><td>Wide</td><td>Road</td><td>Weed</td><td>Rise</td><td>Wet</td><td>Rain</td><td>Run</td><td>Rate</td></tr><tr><td>Set 16</td><td>Nice</td><td>Low</td><td>Noon</td><td>Lie</td><td>No</td><td>Lot</td><td>Nail</td><td>Need</td><td>Loop</td><td>Knock</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Appendix IV. List of Minimal Pairs Used in Task 2

<html><body><table><tr><td>Set 1</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Bin</td><td>Bean</td><td>2. Seek</td><td>Sick</td><td>3. Hill</td><td>Heal</td></tr><tr><td>4. Eat</td><td>It</td><td>5. Peach</td><td>Pitch</td><td>6. Dip</td><td>Deep</td></tr><tr><td>Set 2</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Hood</td><td>Who&#x27;d</td><td>2. Wooed</td><td>Wood</td><td>3. Cooed</td><td>Could</td></tr><tr><td>4. Fool</td><td>Full</td><td>5. Look</td><td>Luke</td><td>6. Pull</td><td>Pool</td></tr><tr><td>Set 3</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Wok</td><td>Walk</td><td>2. Dawn</td><td>Don</td><td>3. Nought</td><td>Not</td></tr><tr><td>4. Hawk</td><td>Hock</td><td>5. Pod</td><td>Pawed</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 4</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Bad</td><td>Bed</td><td>2. Rack</td><td>Wreck</td><td>3. Said</td><td>Sad</td></tr><tr><td>4. Set</td><td>Sat</td><td>5. Guess</td><td>Gas</td><td>6. Man</td><td>Men</td></tr><tr><td>Set 5</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Dill</td><td>Dew</td><td>2. Fill</td><td>Few</td><td>3. New</td><td>Ni1</td></tr><tr><td>4. Mew</td><td>Mill</td><td>5. Kill</td><td>Queue</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 6</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Surf</td><td>Serve</td><td>2. Save</td><td>Safe</td><td>3. Leaf</td><td></td></tr><tr><td>4. View</td><td>Few</td><td>5. Fat</td><td>Vat</td><td>6. Vine</td><td>Leave Fine</td></tr><tr><td>Set 7</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Fought</td><td>Thought</td><td>2. Deaf</td><td>Death</td><td>3. Thirst</td><td>First</td></tr></table></body></html>

<html><body><table><tr><td>4. Thin</td><td>Fin</td><td>5. Ruth</td><td>Roof</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 8</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. They</td><td>Day</td><td>2. Bayed</td><td>Bathe</td><td>3. There</td><td>Dare</td></tr><tr><td>4. Doze</td><td>Those</td><td>5. Die</td><td>Thy</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 9</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Sap</td><td>Zap</td><td>2. Doze</td><td>Dose</td><td>3. Raise</td><td>Race</td></tr><tr><td>4. Zee</td><td>See</td><td>5. Rice</td><td>Rise</td><td>6. Bus</td><td>Buzz</td></tr><tr><td>Set 10</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Choke</td><td> Joke</td><td>2. Joyce</td><td>Choice</td><td>3. Chain</td><td> Jane</td></tr><tr><td>4.H</td><td>Age</td><td>5. Jew</td><td>Chew</td><td>6. Larch</td><td>Large</td></tr><tr><td>Set 11</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Son</td><td>Sung</td><td>2. King</td><td>Kin</td><td>3. Dong</td><td>Don</td></tr><tr><td>4. Ban</td><td>Bang</td><td>5. Gone</td><td>Gong</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 12</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Shame</td><td>Same</td><td>2. Sign</td><td>Shine</td><td>3. Mass</td><td>Mash</td></tr><tr><td>4. Sort</td><td>Short</td><td>5. Shell</td><td>Cell</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 13</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Vent</td><td>Went</td><td>2. While</td><td>Vile</td><td>3.V</td><td>We</td></tr><tr><td>4. Wow</td><td>Vow</td><td>5. Veil</td><td>Whale</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Set 14</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Lay</td><td>Ray</td><td>2. Read</td><td>Lead</td><td>3. Lice</td><td>Rice</td></tr><tr><td>4. Rock</td><td>Lock</td><td>5. Lip</td><td>Rip</td><td>6. Law</td><td>Raw</td></tr><tr><td>Set 15</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Rise</td><td>Wise</td><td>2. Ray</td><td>Way</td><td>3. Woof</td><td>Roof</td></tr><tr><td>4. Which</td><td>Rich</td><td>5. Red</td><td>Wed</td><td>6. One</td><td>Run</td></tr><tr><td>Set 16</td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>1. Net</td><td>Let</td><td>2. Nine</td><td>Line</td><td>3. Loan</td><td>Known</td></tr><tr><td>4. Lip</td><td>Nip</td><td>5. Noon</td><td>Loon</td><td>6. Lock</td><td>Knock</td></tr></table></body></html>

# References

Bauer, R.S., Benedict, P.K., 1997. Modern Cantonese Phonology. In: Trends in Linguistics: Studies and Monographs 102. Mouton de Gruyter, Berlin.   
Bolton, K., Kwok, H., 1990. The dynamics of the Hong Kong accent: social identity and sociolinguistic description. Journal of Asian Pacific Communication 1.1, 147e172.   
Chan, A.Y.W., 2006a. Cantonese ESL learners’ pronunciation of English final consonants. Language, Culture and Curriculum 19.3, 296e313.   
Chan, A.Y.W., 2006b. Strategies used by Cantonese speakers in pronouncing English initial consonant clusters: insights into the interlanguage phonology of Cantonese ESL learners in Hong Kong. International Review of Applied Linguistics in Language Teaching 44, 331e355.   
Chan, A.Y.W., Li, D.C.S., 2000. English and Cantonese phonology in contrast: explaining Cantonese ESL learners’ English pronunciation problems. Language, Culture and Curriculum 13.1, 67e85.   
Deterding, D., 2005. Listening to Estuary English in Singapore. TESOL Quarterly 39.3, 425e440.   
Deterding, D., Kirkpatrick, A., 2006. Emerging South-east Asian Englishes and intelligibility. World Englishes 25.3/4, 391e409.   
Deterding, D., Wong, J., Kirkpatrick, A., 2008. The pronunciation of Hong Kong English. English World-Wide 29.2, 148e175.   
Eckman, F., 1977. Markedness and the contrastive analysis hypothesis. Language Learning 27, 315e330.   
Eckman, F., 1981. On the naturalness of interlanguage phonological rules. Language Learning 31.1, 195e216.   
Edge, B.A., 1991. The production of word-final voiced obstruents in English by L1 speakers of Japanese and Cantonese. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 13, 377e393.   
Flege, J.E., 1995. Second language speech learning: theory, findings and problems. In: Strange, W. (Ed.), Speech Perception and Linguistic Experience: Issues in Cross-Language Research. York Press, Baltimore, pp. 233e277.   
Hung, T.T.N., 2000. Towards a phonology of Hong Kong English. World Englishes 19.3, 337e356.   
Jones, I., 1979. Some cultural and linguistic considerations affecting the learning of English by Chinese children in Britain. English Language Teaching Journal 34.1, 55e61.   
Kenworthy, J., 1987. Teaching English Pronunciation. Longman, London.   
Ladefoged, P., 2006. A Course in Phonetics, fifth ed. Thomson Wadsworth, Boston.   
Lado, R., 1957. Linguistics Across Cultures. the University of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Michigan.   
Lo, S.K., 2005. The acquisition of English final consonants by Cantonese learners of English as a second language in Hong Kong: a study to test the markedness differential hypothesis. In: Paper Presented at The 3rd Annual Hawaii International Conference on Arts and Humanities, Sheraton Waikiki Hotel, Honolulu, USA, 13e16 Jan 2005.   
Maddieson, I., 1984. Patterns of Sounds. Cambridge University Press, New York.   
Major, R.C., Faudree, M.C., 1996. Markedness universals and the acquisition of voicing contrasts by Korean speakers of English. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18, 69e90.   
Peng, L., Setter, J., 2000. The emergence of systematicity in the English pronunciations of two Cantoense-speaking adults in Hong Kong. English World-Wide 21, 81e108.   
Przedlacka, J., 2002. Estuary English? A Sociophonetic Study of Teenage Speech in the Home Counties. Peter Lang, Frankfurt am Main, Germany.   
Roach, P., 2000. English Phonetics and Phonology: a Practical Course, third ed. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.   
Rosewarne, D., 1994. Pronouncing Estuary English. English Today 40.10, 3e7.   
Sewell, A., 2009. World Englishes, English as a Lingua Franca and the case of Hong Kong English. English Today 25.1, 37e43.   
Sproat, R., Fujimura, O., 1993. Allophonic variation in English $/ \mathrm { I } /$ and its implications for phonetic implementation. Journal of Phonetics 21, 291e311.   
Stibbard, R., 2004. The spoken English of Hong Kong: a study of co-occurring segmental errors. Language, Culture and Curriculum 17 (2), 127e142.   
Wong, C.S.P., Setter, J., 2002. Is it ‘night’ or ‘light’? How and why Cantonese speaking ESL learners confuse syllable-initial [n] and [l]. In: James, A., Leather, J. (Eds.), New Sounds 2000: Proceedings of the Fourth International Symposium on the Acquisition of Second Language Speech. Universita¨t Klagenfurt, Klagenfurt, pp. 351e359.