# Ungrading: Revolution or evolution

Deborah Crusan \*,1

Wright State University, USA

# A R T I C L E I N F O

# A B S T R A C T

Keywords: Grading philosophy Democratic writing assessment Ethics and fairness in grading Teachers’ assessment practices

Ungrading, an assessment approach transcending traditional grading methods, has surged in recognition partly due to recognition of disparities in educational systems during COVID. These injustices challenged people of color and English learners. While advocates highlight ungrading’s potential to enhance equity and student engagement, critics underline concerns about power dynamics, increased time commitments, and communication challenges.

As I begin this article focused on ungrading, I am pulled in several directions. One part of me wants to recognize grading as a construct that we might be better off without. In fact, I, along with Matsuda insist that “. grades are a flawed creation—they are imprecise indications of student performance and learning and, if not designed carefully, can privilege performance at the expense of learning” (Crusan & Matsuda, 2018, p. 1). Another part of me wants to argue that our second language (L2) writers2 deserve to know how their performances in our classes meet the expectations of the wider community of knowledge in our specific fields, and what better way of allowing them access than to show them where they stand and how they’re doing. And still another part of me—perhaps the Drama Queen part—wonders if all I have worked toward and worried about for the last 25 years has been wasted time.

Ungrading—one variety of alternative assessment—advocates a shift of control from teacher to student, which I generally applaud. However, I ask myself how I can offer my L2 writers control in my classroom without disadvantaging their future work life; I worry that aligning too closely with their interests might overlook crucial content necessary for their professional development, but this could be groundless worry. That said, I have always argued for a brand of democratic assessment that is ethical and fair, allowing students to become partners in that assessment, helping to make decisions about what will be assessed, how it will be assessed, what counts, and what does not. At this point, I am not convinced that ungrading is the answer to assessment’s inherent problems (e.g., fairness in scoring, lack of teacher training in assessment, test use, bias, ethics) that I have documented over the years (e.g., Crusan, 2010; Crusan, 2015; Crusan & Ruecker, 2022), although it might be part of the answer. I am convinced that ungrading is a concept requiring consideration.

A quick internet search uncovered a flurry of activity in publishing about ungrading with no less than 50 books since 2017. Ad herents to ungrading’s philosophy offer several reasons for their support. One is a concern about teachers maintaining the status quo in regard to grading and whether they are complicit in keeping students in a position of docility (Masland, 2023). In this vein, Kohn (2020) calls for teachers to examine their use of syllabi and the threats within—attendance policies, late policies, grading poli cies—used to control students without thinking about students’ needs, knowledge, and/or interests.

Another issue is the possibility of slowing or stopping learning. Luxon (2022) maintains that assigning a grade to work, even when accompanied by feedback, halts the learning process. She uses ungrading as a way to create opportunities to keep learning going; she uses clear criteria, feedback, and revision as tools students implement ensuring that learning is actually taking place. These are tools that I, and many of my colleagues have used for years, albeit not under the name of ungrading.

Rapchak et al. (2023) consider ungrading a means to bolster equity; they view traditional western grading procedures “subject to instructor preferences and reflective of white, middle-class ideals of learning” (p. 89). Some look to decrease a focus on grades while others call for total elimination (Kohn, 2020; Masland, 2023). All call for greater involvement of students in their education and in the decisions about what to learn, how to learn it, and how to demonstrate that they have learned it.

These scholars, though, often write as if ungrading is a radically new concept and have not recognized that teachers have been using prototypes of ungrading for years. Ungrading’s predecessors (I consider these to be forms of alternative grading as well) in the writing classroom include portfolio grading (Lam, 2018, 2024), contract grading (Inoue, 2022), and specifications grading (Graves, 2023; Streifer & Palmer, 2021). Lam (2018) describes a portfolio-based grading system in which students are evaluated based on a collection of work, rather than just standardized and other test scores. Grades are generally withheld until the end of a term. Showing devel opment of writing skills over an extended period, the portfolio allows for student reflection and evaluation of their skills; Lam (2024) further describes deferred evaluation in paper-based portfolios as grades on final submissions. He endorses deferred evaluation for e-portfolios as well, as it increases validity and helps to “balance the formative and summative purposes of assessment” (2024, p. 31). Inoue (2022) outlines his three-part instruction that makes up labor-based contract grading: “a brief description of the assignment, a statement of the purpose and goals of the labor, and a step-by-step process for completing the labor” (p. 129). O’Meara (2022) points out that “students and teachers together enter into an agreement in which they acknowledge that student effort and labor (i.e., the amount of time, intensity, or application students put into their writing) are the major factors that count in the outcome of an assignment” (p. 81); specifications grading is “an alternative approach to grading that prioritizes transparency, student mastery of learning objectives, careful alignment between assessments and learning objectives, and process and growth-oriented approaches to learning” (Streifer & Palmer, 2021, para. 11). It is important to understand that all of these approaches boast quite similar philosophies although they often use differing terminology. It is also important to realize that each of these approaches still provides final grades although according to Talbert (2023), in most cases, grades are a collaborative endeavor between teacher and student. In this paper, I’ll examine ungrading, its many and varied definitions, its advantages and disadvantages, always taking care to underscore the reality that L2 writing teachers have practiced aspects of ungrading throughout our history.

# 1. What is ungrading and how is it done

Ungrading seems to have as many definitions as there are people advocating for its use. At the core, however, is the idea of student engagement, student accountability, equity, the democratic classroom, and the ability for students, with teacher guidance, to come to agreement about what is important (Koehler & Meech, 2022). Inoue (2022) contends: “Doing grading well, either at the secondary or postsecondary level, is not simply about finding the best practice, method, or mechanism” (p. 3). But in light of the many definitions of ungrading and methodological variability, it appears that one does not need to go all in to make their grading practices more equitable and learning-focused.

Generally, ungrading is a pedagogical approach that touts learning over grades, which, at the surface, is a difficult concept to dispute; it has gained traction in classrooms from K-12 and higher education, mostly within the L1 community. Talbert (2022) cites Blum’s work (2017, 2020b) followed by wide discussion of the concept on social media as catalysts in the recent wave of ungrading’s popularity. However, explorations of any variety, form, or brand using the term ungrading within the L2 writing community are sparse; Sims (2023) cites the lack of examination of contract grading (again, an approach that I would refer to as a form of ungrading) with multilingual writers declaring, “ … scholarship on labor-based contract grading has yet to investigate this method of assessment in sheltered multilingual contexts, nor has it considered multilingual writing instructors’ perceptions of this method of assessment” (p. 1) even in the face of Inuoe’s (2022) claim that ungrading is especially beneficial to multilingual students.

However novel we might regard ungrading, though, it is not a new concept. Von Bergen (2023b) traces ungrading’s origins to conversations in major composition journals in the 1970s, in which teachers argued that grades are largely ineffective tools often interfering with student learning; many of these teachers believe that “ungrading functions as a tool of (possible) response to injustice and social change” (Von Bergen, 2023a, p. 139). Further, Von Bergen (2023a) points out that disciplines outside composition view ungrading as a “fluid set of assessment practices, and some scholars deploy the term to refer to a particular version of alternative assessment: students assigning their own grades in consultation with their teachers” (p. 137). Ferns et al. (2021) define ungrading as an “alternative approach for promoting and measuring learning” (p. 4500). Instructors do not assign grades but provide feedback indi vidually as well as guiding students through the peer review process and teaching students good self-assessment techniques.

Although Blum (2020a) argues that ungrading is neither time saving nor efficient, she believes that it can “lead to greater learning and more positive [teacher-student] relationships” (p. 219). Blum’s authors in her edited collection (2020b) outline varied alternative models in order to assess student learning, all of which they label ungrading. In this collection, Kohn (2020) claims that we should free ourselves from grading since grading “has three predictable effects: Less interest in learning, a preference for easier tasks, and shal lower thinking” (p. xiv) but while he calls for teachers to examine their assessment practices and adopt alternative methods, he fails to recognize L2 assessment scholars such as O’Malley and Valdez Pierce (1996) who decades before, promoted alternative, authentic means of assessment including oral interviews, story or text retelling, writing samples, project s/exhibitions/experiments/demonstrations, constructed-response items, teacher observations, and portfolios.

In regard to ungrading methodologies, Stommel (2023) explains how he performs ungrading: he asks students to write self-reflections and give themselves grades, saying that his primary goal is to “help students develop the ability to do this kind of metacognitive work” (p. 72) arguing that the work is difficult, but to help students through those complications, he offers time for them to figure out what they must do. He responds to students’ reflections and so begins a conversation that he reports is “profoundly different from the kinds of interactions we would have in a purely transactional system” (p. 73). He asks students to grade themselves simply because he is required to submit final grades. When he disagrees with the grade a student has given to themselves, he tells them, “It isn’t really my place to worry about that at length” (p. 74), and instead offers feedback, arguing for objectivity. Like $_ { 0 } ,$ Malley and Valdez Pierce (1996), Stommel offers alternative approaches to assessment including grade free zones (instructor decides to grade fewer assignments), self-assessment, process letters (students describe what they learned and how their work illustrates this learning), minimal grading (some assigned work is not collected and not graded), authentic assessment, contract grading, portfolios, peer assessment, and student made rubrics. I maintain that many L2 writing teachers have been using these approaches for years.

# 2. Advantages of ungrading

One of the most cited advantages (Crogman et al., 2023; Graves, 2023; Rapchak et al., 2023) of ungrading is the idea that it shifts the focus from grades to learning outcomes, emphasizing the development of critical thinking, creativity, and problem solving. Guberman (2021) argues that “systems such as ungrading have potential for contributing to the construction of highly effective and meaningful learning environments” (p. 86). Stommel (2023), widely recognized as the originator of the term ungrading, is considered one of its foremost advocates. Though he continues to submit grades at term’s end, he has relied for twenty years on qualitative feedback, peer review, and self-assessment in the classroom. He admits to some failure but claims, “we don’t change our learning; we find new tools for assessment” (p. 2). Stommel (2020) encourages student agency and brings students into conversations about choices regarding grades. He cites students’ ability to think more critically about “why and how grading happens” (p. 35) as one of the ad vantages of his practice. He walks the talk. Other advantages of ungrading include a reduction in stress with the removal of the pressure of grades, which can allow for more engagement with course material (Stommel, 2023; Streifer & Palmer, 2021). Scholars also cite a possible increase in motivation when worry about grades is removed (Hasinoff et al., 2024).

In their discussion of ungrading’s advantages, Crogman et al. (2023) argue that grading systems typically in use assume all students are even, that they begin at the same level and that ungrading might remove this assumption. They explore more student-focused grading systems that shift the focus to assessing student improvement. The authors claim that their grading approach “holds stu dents accountable for their knowledge gaps” (p. 1) thereby augmenting equity. Carillo (2023) argues for the adoption of assessment practices like “engagement-based grading that acknowledges students’ disabilities, including anxiety and depression and don’t neglect students who are multiply marginalized” (p. 131). Engagement-based grading is akin to labor-based/contract grading in which student grades are based on how much students engage with the course material. A contract specifies time spent on tasks, and the amount of labor needed to receive a certain grade.

# 3. Disadvantages of ungrading

One of the first drawbacks to ungrading concerns power. Masland (2023) points out that ungrading may not work for every teacher for a variety of reasons, many of them focusing on their positions of power in their institutions. Some may not have tenure; likewise, some identities might make it harder to ungrade. She claims, “Grading is a rule I can break because I have a pretty wide margin to break rules. Were I in a different body, though, ungrading might make me seem incompetent in the eyes of my students or colleagues” (p. 92). Stommel (2023) too confesses that his approach is not for everybody, that it “won’t necessarily work in each classroom, at every institution, for all teachers, with every group of students” (p. 71). Streifer and Palmer (2023) remind us that adopting alternative grading methods is far from innocuous. They claim:

… any time pedagogical practices challenge institutional orthodoxies, the instructors who adopt and advocate for them risk consequences ranging from student, colleague, and administrator resistance to formal criticism and censure. These risks are not evenly distributed: contingent instructors, instructors who hold minoritized identities, or those who teach under inhospitable circumstances are more likely to face pushback against their innovations. (p. 250)

Another possible disadvantage concerning ungrading is that it could be viewed as even more subjective than current grading methods, but grading, no matter how we do it and no matter how hard we try to be objective, is always subjective, even if students make the final call. In order to remove some of that subjectivity, teachers need to think about what is important for their students to be able to do in any given assignment. They then need to clarify their expectations and convey them to their students. Often, teachers struggle with clarification and communication. Some might hold the idea that too much talk about assessment and assignments is wasted time in the classroom, taking away valuable teaching time.

Rosenfeld (2023) points out other limitations and challenges to ungrading. The first involves the major time commitment at work in ungrading. Small class sizes lend themselves to ungrading as it is more feasible to have one-on-one conversations with a smaller number of students, but when this number grows to the $1 0 0 s _ { \mathrm { ; } }$ , instructor labor multiplies and the burden becomes unwieldy. Rosenfeld also cites the emotional drain on instructors who practice ungrading, citing “working through barriers” (p. 60) with students as exhausting even with small class sizes. A final challenge cited by Rosenfeld centers on communication, with some students and faculty having difficulty understanding the mechanisms and goals of ungrading. They reported that some students thought assignments were being graded without sharing grades, so they cautioned to be clear about definitions of ungrading as there are many and varied forms of alternative grading.

Regarding these limitations, as a teacher, I recall the semesters when I have used portfolio grading, withholding a grade until the end of the semester. I gave a tremendous amount of feedback on each draft of my students’ papers, but even though no letter grade was provided, I was often surprised when many of the students did not heed my advice, revising little or not at all. Then there were those who were laser focused on the grade they would receive at the end of the semester. They would beg me for some indication about where they stood in the class. They made no secret that they wanted to know their grade. They would come to my office and ask, “If you had to give me a grade right now, what would it be?” They were very stressed by the lack of a tangible letter grade; no amount of positive feedback on their writing could satisfy them. They seemed worried that I might be capricious at grade time.

Still another issue concerns me as I most often find myself in the composition classroom with international students and others who are English learners. I am confronted with this question: Will I appear unprofessional in the eyes of my students if I choose to practice ungrading, particularly international students accustomed to a different, more teacher-centered system, a turnaround of sorts from Masland’s (2023) ability to break the rules. This and the other disadvantages listed should be carefully considered before making the decision to practice ungrading.

# 4. Where I stand on ungrading

Reflecting on my stance, while I uphold the importance of fair and transparent assessment, I recognize the value of ungrading’s principles, which align with many existing best practices in L2 writing education. In my teaching, I incorporate elements of ungrading, focusing on feedback, student engagement, and project-based assessment. However, based on my examination of some of the current scholarship regarding ungrading, I have come to the conclusion that no one advocates for one right way to ungrade, and there are many definitions of ungrading. In fact, Talbert (2022) calls ungrading a concept that has “stubbornly resisted definition” (para. 4); it has been described as an ongoing process, a diverse set of practices, a philosophy, even a point of resistance. To a certain extent, ungrading seems to be a means to delegate the task of grading to actual learners in the classroom; I am a proponent of this delegation since I consider self-assessment a powerful tool for students. However, I also believe that assessment is a powerul tool for teachers as it apprises us of how our students are doing, what they know, what they have not learned yet, and what we might need to reteach, so I cannot give full endorsement to ungrading as the only assessment practiced in the classroom.

I have consistently believed that teachers play a crucial role in both conducting assessments and ensuring the ethical standards of those assessments. They are undoubtedly key stakeholders in the assessment process (Hamp-Lyons, 2000). However, I am cognizant of the damage bad assessment can inflict on students. In order to alleviate that damage and raise awareness of good and not-so-good assessment practices, at the beginning of each semester in most classes I have taught, I have consistently asked my students two questions:

1. What is your best experience with the assessment of writing as a student? as a teacher?   
2. What is your worst/most difficult experience with the assessment of writing as a student? as a teacher?

By far, the worst/most difficult experience with assessment of writing as a student is perennially the clearest and most painful to my students; when our discussion begins, time and again, my students respond to the as-a-student part of the second question most often, and their response is pointed, example-filled, and frequently focused on a teacher who they feel used assessment to punish students (e. g., pop quizzes, no opportunity to revise, limited assignment criteria). These conversations with my students have led me to argue: “… if teachers want to count something when assessing a writing assignment, then they need to tell their students what counts” (Crusan, 2010, p. 59). During these discussions, the depth of my students’ trauma with bad writing assessment cannot be misconstrued. I understand this, as I suffered this kind of assessment many times and have written about it (see for example Crusan, 2010, p. 58). Therefore, it is not lost on me that ungrading has gained traction.

Nevertheless, a call for the wholesale endorsement of ungrading as the last word in assessment reminds me of the translingual turn in composition and rhetoric, brought on by a sincere interest in language diversity, which, at first, was welcomed within the L2 writing community. However, many L2 writing scholars were troubled by the ostensible conflation of L2 writing and translingual writing, worrying that translingual writing might be viewed as a “replacement for or improved version of L2 writing” (Atkinson et al., 2015, p. 384), an idea at odds with the positions of most L2 writing scholars. L2 writing scholars were also a bit nonplussed by the perceived idea that translingual writing scholars assumed they had invented language for concepts or the concepts themselves; an example of this is the notion of code-switching, the practice of moving between two or more languages in a conversation, recognized in our field since its inception. Many of the ideological concerns of translingual scholars were those that have been addressed in the field of L2 writing for years, so some L2 scholars were left wondering if our debate was something of a terminology issue or a possibility that they had not had the opportunity to explore the literature on L2 writing.

I can say the same for concerns of advocates of ungrading when they espouse concepts such as sharing feedback, offering opportunities for revision, employing clear assignment and assessment criteria, engaging students in peer- and self-assessment, providing one-on-one conferencing opportunities between teacher and student, and engaging students in assignment and assessment creation, facets of the teaching of writing that we as a community of scholars and teachers have long advocated.

For example, Ferris (2003, 2013, 2014) work is some of the most thorough scholarship in the field concerning feedback quality, quantity, and a veritable canon cataloguing what to do and what not to do, impeccably researched and written in language that teachers can understand and use. Lam’s (e.g., 2018, 2024) bountiful research regarding portfolios guides instructors through the hows and whys of portfolios, nodding to possible landmines, and listing ways to make this approach to writing assessment work in various classrooms. Hamp-Lyons (2000, 2002, 2003) has unswervingly tackled ethical writing assessment issues from the position of students, classroom teachers, scholars, and language testing professionals. Cushing’s Weigle (2002, 2007, 2013) work on teacher education in writing assessment (2007) discloses what teachers need to know about assessment in the clearest and most profound terms. Further, Cushing adds to writing assessment knowledge through her investigation (along with Martin East) of rubrics (East & Cushing, 2016) and the controversial topic of machine scoring of essays (2013). Her book (2002) tackles important pedagogical questions that any writing teacher needs to consider when assessing students, questions that had rarely been addressed prior to publication of Assessing Writing. These scholars write through the lens of the teacher educator; all are veterans of the classroom whose practice reflects their theoretical stance.

Clark and Talbert (2023) argue that two things missing from traditional grading are the lack of reattempts or revisions of student work and the lack of useful feedback other than possibly crossing things out in students’ work or providing one-word invectives (e.g., AWK! or What?). To counter this belief and demonstrate the use of revision and feedback in my own practice, I will outline my TESOL Practices & Materials group or pair course project, which encompasses a large portion of the final grade for the course. The project has four components: a preliminary needs analysis of a specific group of ESL learners, a course syllabus, two lesson plans, and a micro-teaching demonstration (including a written reflection).

Each component has very specific criteria and a rubric created specifically for that task; these documents are available to students from the beginning of the course. Components are due in draft form at different times during the semester as noted in the course schedule. Many discussions of components and their accompanying criteria/rubrics ensue in class until I am certain that students understand the tasks and how they will be assessed. I am also available in my office and through online meetings for consultations about the project and its components throughout the semester. When I finally read drafts, I use the rubric for that specific component to provide both feedback and this-is-your-grade-without-revision. If students are unsatisfied with that grade, they may revise once before moving on to the next component of the project. I practice this kind of assessment in all classes, and I am certain that many of my L2 writing colleagues practice a similar brand of ethical assessment.

In fact, I believe that much of what ungrading champions has long been embraced by L2 writing teachers. For example, as a community of practitioners, L2 writing teachers have been utilizing alternative assessment for decades; as mentioned earlier, O’Malley and Valdez Pierce published a book (28 years ago) called Authentic Assessment for English Language Learners: Practical Approaches for Teachers. I have used this book in my assessment class for 25 years. Although it has become a bit dated and although it is geared toward K-12, the theoretical framework and the activities and rubrics in the book remain valid and useful.

It seems to me that adherents of ungrading might have experienced some issues in their own educations with teachers who could have used assessment as a tool of compliance; that is, they punished students with various cruel assessment activities. I also believe that what appears to be a complete shift toward ungrading by many of these scholars is a hasty response, likely due to underdeveloped assessment philosophies and possibly a lack of exposure to courses or workshops on pedagogy and assessment methods. There also seems to be an assumption that all teachers use traditional assessment methodologies when that might be only partially true. Might I be so bold as to suggest that many of the ideas presented in the ungrading literature appear to stem from misunderstandings or gaps in understanding the field of L2 writing and our pedagogical training? However, I might be overstepping by making these assertions. On the other hand, as a L2 writing assessment scholar, I have always been astonished at the lack of citation of scholars of L2 writing assessment in L1 writing assessment literature; I note the same issue in my examination of ungrading literature.

Considering all of this, I can still defend some tenets of ungrading, regardless of whether or not its devotees are aware of my practice and/or body of work, which adheres to many of the tenets of ungrading. For example, in my practice which includes instruction of prospective teachers, I have long addressed the ethical issues surrounding assessment, reminding students that they should not use assessment as a club, beating their students into submission in the never-ending quest for more points. Based on the definitions of ungrading (Carrillo, 2023; Stommel, 2023) I have uncovered, I practice ungrading in my classroom. I do not grade every assignment, especially the work-in-a-group-and-present-your-findings activities. Other assignments receive a check unless the assignment is missing. If that happens, I have a conversation with the student, reminding them of the importance of their involvement in this learning environment. Much of my assessment is project-based, with students receiving copious amounts of feedback on work, which can be resubmitted in answer to the feedback received. For the most part, I use student-created/developed rubrics, or at the very least, rubrics that students have been introduced to and discussed at length in the classroom, often leading to revision of rubrics. All of these strategies have been outlined as instrumental to student engagement in the ungrading literature.

Much discussion surrounding ungrading cites a significant change in procedure in the classroom; Guberman (2021) claims that tests and quizzes do not align well with ungrading. I agree. In fact, I give few tests, relying more on projects and group activities in my classroom in order to assess my students’ grasp of the material; however, I attach grades to much of this work, particularly the projects which are most often semester-long undertakings such as curriculum, course, and lesson development, based on what my students have learned and applying it to their real students either in classroom or tutoring contexts. For example, the project in a course called TESOL Grammar involves creating activities and lessons after my students gather data from their English learner students to inform their work. Since these projects tend to be the bulk of the course grade, I am careful to provide intense criteria and a rubric that mirrors those criteria. I also offer models that students can examine in class, and we review the project many times to make sure that everyone is on the same page and understands terminology involved.

For all of my career, I have believed the following: Assessment is a, perhaps the central process in effective instruction. It is only through assessment that we can find out whether a particular sequence of instructional activities has resulted in the intended learning outcomes. What becomes of that philosophy if I adopt ungrading? I have fought over the years for fair and equitable assessment (Crusan, 2010) and that assessment and assignments are inextricably interwoven (Crusan & Ruecker, 2022), that good assessment practices equal good teaching. I have outlined many times how teachers can provide feedback and information reliably, validly, fairly, ethically, and thoroughly about how students are doing.

I still believe in my brand of assessment: that any assessment used must be fair, equitable, tailored to student needs, transparent, and used in ways that benefit students rather than punish them. I have a fierce conviction that teachers need to know how to discover what their students can and cannot do and how to use that knowledge to decide what to teach next and how to teach it; that is, I believe that good assessment helps shape teachers’ pedagogy. I also believe that teachers need to assess less frequently and to enact those assessment instances across multiple genres. Writing teachers need to know what good writing is (appropriate to content and purpose for writing) and be able to communicate that to their students through writing assignment criteria. Teachers also need to know what growth in writing looks like, how to informally assess students’ metacognitive processes, deliver useful feedback, use portfolios to help writers develop, and employ self-assessment and reflection to develop ability (Crusan, 2023). Many of these ideas align well with ungrading.

# 5. Conclusion

As I reflect on my own teaching philosophy and how it aligns with many of the principles of ungrading, I ask myself: Who wouldn’t adopt at least parts of ungrading? Let’s consider the notion of critical pedagogy, an educational approach dedicated to empowering students and transforming the broader social order to promote justice and equality. Critical pedagogy’s primary objective is to create a framework that enables educators and others to understand and analyze the connections between education and the wider social dynamics that shape it. The opportunity to embrace the democratic classroom and critical pedagogy using some of the canons of ungrading is certainly attractive and would seem to resonate with teachers; however, some faculty may not have been trained in pedagogy. That is, they might never have taken teacher-training courses that allow for reflection on what they are doing in class, why they are doing it, and what effects it might have on their students. Many might be merely teaching as they have been taught, failing to take their students into account until they recognize the harm that some grading systems might do, and for this group, learning about ungrading is a welcome respite from the grade-as-weapon mentality. However, as I have claimed earlier in this paper, for most of us who call ourselves second language writing scholars and practitioners, I don’t believe this is a fitting description.

Ultimately, as in any worthwhile academic discussion whether focused on theory or practice, the conversation around ungrading prompts educators to assess their pedagogical and grading philosophies. By engaging in these conversations, we gain insights into our motivations and strive to create more inclusive and effective learning environments. It is possible that ungrading will be a part of pedagogical conversations for the foreseeable future, particularly to help educators cater to the requisite flexibility of the postpandemic classroom. While ungrading may not be a one-size fits all solution, these conversations are important as they lead those of us in the classroom to examine our pedagogy, our philosophy on grading, and many of the motivations that answer the question: Why do I teach?

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Deborah Crusan: Investigation, Writing – original draft, Writing – review & editing.

# Declaration of Competing Interest

I have no conflicts of interest to disclose.

# Data availability

No data was used for the research described in the article.

# References

Atkinson, D., Crusan, D., Matsuda, P. K., Ortmeier-Hooper, C., Ruecker, T., Simpson, S., & Tardy, C. (2015). Clarifying the relationship between L2 writing and translingual writing: An open letter to writing studies editors and organization leaders. College English, 77(4), 383–389.   
Blum, S.D. (2017, November 14). Ungrading: The significant learning benefits of getting rid of grades. Inside Higher Ed. https://www.insiderhighered.com/advice/ 2017/11/14/significant- learning-benefits-getting-rid-grades-essay.   
Blum, S. D. (2020a). Not simple but essential. In S. D. Blum (Ed.), Ungrading: Why rating students undermines learning (and what to do instead (pp. 219–228). West Virginia: University Press.   
Blum, S.D. (Ed.). (2020b). Ungrading: Why rating students undermines learning (and what to do instead). West Virginia University Press.   
Carillo, E. C. (2023). Ungrading: Where we are and where we might go. Composition Studies, 51(2), 131–136.   
Clark, D., & Talbert, R. (2023). Grading for growth: A guide to alternative grading practices that promote authentic learning and student engagement in higher education. Routledge. https://doi.org/10.4324/9781003445043-2   
Crogman, H. T., Eshun, K. O., Jackson, M., TrebeauCrogman, M. A., Joseph, E., Warner, L. C., & Erenso, D. B. (2023). Ungrading: The case for abandoning institutionalized assessment protocols and improving pedagogical strategies. Education Sciences, 13(11), 1091. https://doi-org.ezproxy.libraries.wright.edu/ 10.3390/educsci13111091.   
Crusan, D. (2010). Assessment in the second language writing classroom. University of Michigan Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.770334.   
Crusan, D. (2015). Dance, ten; looks, three: Why rubrics matter. Assessing Writing, 26, 1–4. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2015.08.002   
Crusan, D. (2023). Shaping teachers’ writing assessment practices: The effect of teacher beliefs. In R. Kohls, & C. P. Casanave (Eds.), Perspectives on Good Writing in Applied Linguistics and TESOL. University of Michigan Press. https://doi.org/10.3998/mpub.11930285.   
Crusan, D., & Matsuda, P.K. (2018). Classroom writing assessment. In J. I. Liontas (Editor-in- Chief), The TESOL encyclopedia of English language teaching. WileyBlackwell. https://doi.org/10.1002/ 9781118784235.eelt0541.   
Crusan, D. & Ruecker, T. (2022). Linking assignments with assessments: A guide for teachers. University of Michigan Press. DOI: https://doi.org/10.3998/ mpub.10206052.   
East, M., & Cushing, S. (2016). Innovation in rubric use: Exploring different dimensions. Assessing Writing, 30, 1–2. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.ASW.2016.09.001   
Ferns, S., Hickey, R., & Williams, H. (2021). Ungrading: Supporting our students through a pedagogy of care. International Journal for Cross-Disciplinary Subjects in Education, 12(2), 4500–4504. https://doi.org/10.20533/ijcdse.2042.6364.2021.0550   
Ferris, D. (2003). Responding to writing. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the Dynamics of Second Language Writing (pp. 119–140). Cambridge University Press. https://doi. org/10.1017/CBO9781139524810.010.   
Ferris, D. R. (2014). Responding to student writing: Teachers’ philosophies and practices. Assessing Writing, 19, 6–23. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2013.09.004   
Ferris, D. R., Liu, H., Sinha, A., & Senna, M. (2013). Written corrective feedback for individual L2 writers. Assessing Writing, 22(3), 307–329. https://doi.org/10.1016/ j.jslw.2012.09.009   
Graves, B. C. (2023). Specifications grading to promote student engagement, motivation and learning: Possibilities and cautions. Assessing Writing, 57, 1–4. https:// doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100754   
Guberman, D. (2021). Student perceptions of an online ungraded course. Teaching Learning Inquiry, 9(1), 86–98. https://doi.org/10.20343/teachlearninqu.9.1.8   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (2000). Social, professional, and individual responsibility in language testing. System, 28, 579–591. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0346-251X(00)00039-   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (2002). Ethical Standards and Practical Realities: Dilemmas in Language Testing. English Teaching, 57, 237–244.   
Hamp-Lyons, L. (2003). Writing teachers as assessors of writing. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Exploring the Dynamics of Second Language Writing (pp. 162–189). Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139524810.   
Hasinoff, A. A., Bolyard, W., DeBay, D., Dunlap, J. C., Mosier, A. C., & Pugliano, E. (2024). Success was actually having learned: University student perceptions of ungrading. Teaching Learning Inquiry: The ISSOTL Journal, 12. https://doi-org.ezproxy.libraries.wright.edu/10.20343/teachlearninqu.12.5.   
Inoue, A.B. (2022). Labor-based contracts: Building equity and inclusion in the compassionate writing classroom (2nd ed.). The WAC Clearinghouse &. University Press of Colorado. DOI: 10.37514/PER-B.2022.1824.   
Koehler, A. A., & Meech, S. (2022). Ungrading learner participation in a student-centered learning experience. TechTrends: Linking Research Practice to Improve Learning, 66(1), 78–89. https://doi-org.ezproxy.libraries.wright.edu/10.1007/s11528-021-00682-w.   
Kohn, A. (2020). Foreword. In S.D. Blum (Ed.), Ungrading: Why rating students undermines learning (and what to do instead) (pp. xiii-xx). West Virginia University Press.   
Lam, R. (2018). Portfolio assessment for the teaching and learning of writing. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-1174-1_2.   
Lam, R. (2024). [Forthcoming]. Integrating e-Portfolios into L2 Classrooms: Education for Future. Multilingual Matters.   
Luxon, E. (2022, March 21). Ungrading doesn’t necessarily mean no grades. So, what does it mean? https://umdearborn.edu/news/ungrading-doesnt-necessarilymean-no-grades-so- what-does-it-mean.   
Masland, L. (2023). Ungrading: The joys of doing everything wrong. Zeal: A Journal for the Liberal Arts, 1(2), 88–93.   
O’Malley, J. M., & Valdez Pierce, L. (1996). Authentic assessment for English learners: Practical approaches for teachers. Longman.   
O’Meara, K. D. (2022). Building response into labor-based grading contracts. Journal of Response to Writing, 8(1), 81–89. https://scholarsarchive.byu.edu/journalrw/ vol8/iss1/4.   
Rapchak, M., Hands, A. S., & Hensley, M. K. (2023). Moving toward equity: Experiences with ungrading. Journal of Education for Library Information Science, 64(1), 89–98. https://doi-org.ezproxy.libraries.wright.edu/10.3138/jelis-2021-0062.   
Rosenfeld, H. (2023). Ungrading for cartographic education: Reflections from small undergraduate classes. Cartographic Perspectives, 101, 56–62. https://doi-org. ezproxy.libraries.wright.edu/10.14714/CP101.1775.   
Sims, M. L. (2023). Shifting perceptions of socially just writing assessment: Labor-based contract grading and multilingual writing instruction. Assessing Writing, 57, 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asw.2023.100731   
Stommel, J. (2020). How to ungrade. In S. D. Blum (Ed.), Ungrading: Why Rating Students Undermines Learning (and What to do Instead) (pp. 25–41). West Virginia University Press.   
Stommel, J. (2023). Undoing the grade: Why we grade, and how to stop. Hybrid Pedagogy, Inc. https://doi.org/10.1080/15512169.2024.2338479.   
Streifer, A.C. & Palmer, M.S. (2021). Alternative grading: Practices to support both equity and learning. https://teaching.virginia.edu/resources/alternative-gradingpractices-to-support- both-equity-and-learning.   
Streifer, A. C., & Palmer, M. S. (2023). Is specifications grading right for me?: A readiness assessment to help instructors decide. College Teaching, 71(4), 245–251. https://doi.org/10.1080/87567555.2021.2018396   
Talbert, R. (2022, April 26). What I’ve learned from ungrading. Inside Higher Education. https://www.insidehighered.com/advice/2022/04/27/professor-sharesbenefits-and- drawbacks-ungrading-opinion.   
Talbert, R. (2023, January 4). A stop/start/continue for the ungrading community. Robert Talbert, Ph.D. https://rtalbert.org/a-stop-start-continue-for-the-ungradingcommunity/.   
Von Bergen, M. (2023a). Defining Ungrading: Alternative writing assessment as.   
Von Bergen, M. (2023b). (Un)grading as institutional ecology: How (alternative) assessment choices shape writing classrooms (Doctoral dissertation). 〈https://trace. tennessee.edu/utk_graddiss/8502〉.   
Weigle, S. C. (2002). Assessing Writing. Cambridge University Press. https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511732997   
Weigle, S. C. (2007). Teaching writing teacher about assessment. Journal of Second Language Writing, 16, 194–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jslw.2007.07.004   
Weigle, S. (2013). English language learners and automated scoring of essays: Critical considerations. Assessing Writing, 18(1), 85–99. https://doi.org/10.1016/J. ASW.2012.10.006