Book review

# Book review During the dissertation: A textual mentor for doctoral students in the process of writing Paperback: UK£21.50/US\$25, , in: Cristine Pearson Casanave (Ed.), Kindle edition,. . University of Michigan Press, Michigan (2020). p. 216 -13: 978e0472037902, UK£15.44 /US\$20.

This book provides a helpful “textual mentor” for dissertation writers in the social sciences. Its primary audience is graduate students, both those who use English as a home language and those who use English as an additional language (EAL). A secondary audience is students’ advisors/supervisors, as the book also aims to foster their empathy for students by providing a greater understanding of what students may go through while writing. As with the book’s precursor, Before the Dissertation (Casanave, 2014), Casanave provides a “textual mentor” for dissertation writers that focuses not only on the process of dissertation writing, but also on students’ emotional and physical well-being, a topic often mentioned in similar books, but addressed less thoroughly. Casanave characterizes the dissertation stage as a pleasurable moment of “being immersed in one’s ideas, goals, challenges, intellectual interest, and writing rituals.” However students will likely welcome the overarching focus of the book on “the difficult aspects of and negative responses to doctoral dissertation writing” (p. x). Specifically, the book aims to encourage doctoral students who are “struggling or dreading or balking or angsting” (p. x) to finish their dissertations.

Of the book’s 10 chapters, four directly relate to writing. Three additional chapters treat the emotional, physical, and psychological well-being of writers, and three more cover doctoral students’ relationships with advisors/supervisors. Each chapter ends with a summary of the main points and questions for readers to reflect on their experiences.

Casanave begins the book by asserting the importance of student writers knowing their personal writing styles and biorhythms so they can adapt their strategies and become more productive and successful writers. She revives a suggestion put forward in Before the Dissertation that students should have a purpose for writing, ideally one arising from a deep interest and passion for one’s project rather than only from instrumental purposes. In Chapter 2, Casanave outlines a dissertation as being a whole that comprises parts. She suggests that writers create a vision for achieving the whole by conceptualizing and writing each part separately. She encourages students to start by writing the methodology chapter as a way to raise their confidence as, she asserts, this chapter is descriptive and thus requires less analytic and theoretical thinking than do other sections. With Chapter 2’s structure providing a map, Casanave urges writers to produce initial versions of dissertation chapters without feeling they have to read everything about a topic. Instead she suggests that while reading, students note when they reach “the saturation point where names and authors become familiar” (p. 26). Revision becomes, as Chapter 9 discusses, an inevitable aspect of dissertation writing, a crucial message that the book drives homedand one that often comes as a surprise to doctoral student writers. Casanave explicates the revision process as requiring students to be confident in what they are putting forward yet open to accepting feedback that can inform textual changes. The final chapter dedicated to writing, Chapter 10, discusses when students should stop writing and instead deepen their resolve to complete and revise the dissertation.

The intervening chapters tackle the contextual issues that can influence students’ experiences while writing the dissertation. Chapter 3 explores the value of building good and trusting relationships between writers and advisors, who, Casanave argues, should not only supervise the dissertation and mentor students into their future trajectories but also support students’ emotional well-being (though not all advisors would agree that they have this responsibility). She acknowledges that neither supervisors nor students may know how to deal with the tensions that can occur in situations that require understanding of the stress that can arise on both sides. To forestall or address these problems, she suggests establishing regular communication, setting clear expectations, identifying problems early on, and building trust. Further, as Chapter 4 discusses, perfectionism on both sides of the relationship can increase students’ anxiety levels and hinder their progress, as Casanave argues, “perfectionism is the enemy of completion” (p. 54). Rather than aiming for perfection, Casanave suggests working toward clarity and coherence in the dissertation. Finally, Chapter 8 highlights how students’ commitments to family and other types of work can distract from their writing. To cope, Casanave suggests that students establish regular writing habits and rituals, good advice also offered in other books on writing a dissertation or journal articles.

The third cluster of chapters focuses on dissertation writers’ physical and emotional health. As do other dissertation guides (e.g., Blair, 2016; Bolker, 1998), Chapter 5 recommends that students establish regular habits of exercise, sleep, and healthy eating to manage stress and generate energy. Casanave highlights the importance of students understanding what causes their stress and taking steps to manage it; she also recommends that supervisors encourage students to maintain a healthy lifestyle. The explicit connection between stress and writing the dissertation is continued in Chapter 6, which provides writing strategies for moments when students lack motivation and may have low productivity. In Chapter 7’s look at emotional well-being, Casanave suggests that students view dissertation writing from a social perspective and join writing groups to manage the sense of isolation that is common at this stage.

Overall, Casanave uses reader-friendly language with little jargon to provide mentorship to dissertation writers. A strength of the book is its consideration of not only the process of writing, but also the mental and emotional issues that can arise. Rather than viewing dissertation writing as a mechanical process, Casanave exhibits her strong humanistic perspective in arguing that, “it is normal for the dissertation writing experience to be emotional and psychological as well as intellectual” (p. ix). In addition, she gives ideas for managing challenges in the relationship between students and advisors. Her claim that perfection should not be the goal rings true for the first author, who has just completed her dissertation, because struggling to write a ‘perfect’ dissertation can result in burnout. During the Dissertation therefore goes beyond practical writing issues to focus on the human side of the life of a dissertation writer.

Nonetheless, the book has some weaknesses. For one, its audience is conceived of too narrowlydnot just as social science students, but implicitly as students in the field of language education, and more specifically as students writing qualitative dissertations. While Casanave does not justify the implicit choice of language education, she explains her focus on qualitative dissertations by arguing that writers of qualitative studies need more support because their dissertations are “more labor intensive and less straightforward” (p. viii) than is the case with quantitative research. In fact, we contend that while different methodological approaches have their own challenges, writing a quantitative dissertation presents its own challenges. In any case, many of the textual as well as extra-textual issues in writing a dissertation apply, regardless of research paradigmdand these topics occupy two-thirds of the book.

The narrow lens Casanave adopts may result from the fact that the book is mainly grounded in her own dissertation writing experiences, more than 30 years ago. Her experiences, while likely to be relevant and comforting to many readers, may not be useful for all. And they could have been better supported and generalized by consistently drawing on current empirical research and using more examples from students’ experience. References from the 1980s and 1990s also suggest that the book is not up to date, though various chapters do cite recent research on doctoral student writing and supervision. A more consistent grounding of Casanave’s claims in the findings of recent empirical research may have altered some of the book’s assertions and recommendations. Further, while some quotations from students with whom Casanave has worked are included, these do not always offer sound advice. For example, a quotation from a student who had trouble using reference management software conveys the misguided message that programs such as RefWorks or Zotero are a waste of time. To the contrary, the second author heartily encourages her advisees to use such effective and time-saving programs, despite the inevitable learning curve.

Another dated aspect of the book is the use of the terms “low IQ” and “high IQ” as the guiding trope of Chapter 6. The construct of intelligence quotient (IQ) has long been criticized (e.g., Gould, 1981) as being racist and elitist, but even to those who use IQ, it is not a flexible construct that depends, for example, on whether one has had insomnia. A phrase such as ‘low energy’ or ‘high energy’ would convey the same sense of the problems related to the physical aspects of the intellectual work data analysis and dissertation writing discussed in this chapter.

Perhaps most significantly, the four chapters on writing practices skirt some of the most challenging aspects of constructing a dissertation, such as writing about data analysis and presenting research findings. We disagree, for example, with Chapter 2’s characterization of the dissertation’s methodology chapter as requiring less intellectual effort than other aspects of research design or reporting in the dissertation (Creswell & Poth, 2016). Moreover, Chapter 2 devotes less than one page to “writing about what you found” (pp. 30e31); nor does it discuss the role of theory in articulating findings, which is central to rigorous qualitative data analysis (and sometimes to quantitative data analysis). For neither the first author, a recent PhD graduate, nor the second, her former advisor, does this stage seem “fairly straightforward” (p. 30), as Casanave claims. In fact, for many doctoral students, one of the most difficult aspects of writing a dissertation, especially a qualitative dissertation, is identifying and articulating findings by connecting them to the theoretical lenses used and the research literature. Indeed, we might suggest that the crisis of confidence afflicting many doctoral writers may stem from not understanding how to articulate the knowledge resulting from their research.

Some of the mismatch between our hopes for what the book would offer and what it delivers maybe a function of the term ‘textual mentor’ used as its subtitle, as ‘textual’ refers to the book itself rather than to the texts that students are writing. This approach was more clearly realized in Before the Dissertation and using the same subtitle provides continuity across the books. Overall, we see During the Dissertation as acting not so much as a ‘textual mentor’ for writing the dissertation, but rather as a textual coach who can help students improve their writing practices by developing useful habits and who can act as a caring interlocutor familiar with the emotional and health-related aspects of getting through graduate school.

# References

Blair, L. (2016). Writing a graduate thesis or dissertation. Sense Publishers.   
Bolker, J. (1998). Writing your dissertation in fifteen minutes a day: A guide to starting, revising, and finishing your doctoral thesis. Henry Holt.   
Casanave, C. (2014). Before the dissertation: A textual mentor for doctoral students at the early stages of a research project. University of Michigan Press.   
Creswell, J. W., & Poth, C. N. (2016). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five approaches. Sage.   
Gould, S. J. (1981). The mismeasure of man. W.W. Norton.