# BALEAP news – Introduction to SIGs: Meet the Doctoral Education SIG

# SIG focus, membership, and activities

Whilst EAP expertise is to some extent transferable across different levels of study, working with doctoral students presents particular challenges. Moreover, the often relatively small number of colleagues working in this area in any one institution limits local opportunities to seek support and share ideas. The BALEAP Doctoral Education SIG has the purpose of supporting the practice, professional development and scholarship of practitioners, whose work focuses on the academic language and literacy development of doctoral candidates.

Since launching at the 2021 Glasgow BALEAP conference our membership has grown to 75, with our members working across a large number of institutions in the UK and beyond (e.g., Italy, Luxemburg, Germany, Norway, India, Kazakhstan, Michigan and New Jersey). SIG members work in a variety of contexts and roles, as EAP practitioners, learning developers or academic skills specialists, researcher and/or academic staff trainers, and subject academics. More than half of members work with both users of English as L2 and L1.

SIG communication and activity since BALEAP 2021 has happened mainly via online coffee meets hosted on MS Teams. There have been thirteen meets thus far on topics including: making your work valuable and visible to the university, building relationships, teaching multidisciplinary groups, writing for publication, PGR-specific pre-sessional provisions, working with supervisors, corpora and research writing, speaking skills for doctoral students, doctoral literacy practices, academic literacy approaches, critical thinking, and pastoral care.

Coffee meet sessions are typically led by one or more colleagues and involve both input and plenty of time for discussion, either ‘cocktail party’ style in a series of breakout groups for larger meetings, or, for smaller meetings, as a plenary. The coffee meets have fostered a strong sense of community among regularly attending members, leading to new friendships and collaborations, including joint coffee meet contributions and at least three joint conference papers so far. Members have fed back on the supportive nature of the Doctoral Education SIG and its value as a tool for professional development:

Regularly discussing theory and practice with others working with doctoral students has given me greater confidence to develop my own materials and to focus on this specific area in my research, knowing that there is a supportive community with whom I can share results or ask questions of. My materials are often developed or adapted through ideas which have stemmed from discussions with or recommendations from members. Joining this SIG has been the most productive CPD step I’ve taken in the last five years, not least because it has helped me to see myself as a specialist in this field with something meaningful to contribute to reflections on this distinct area of praxis.

The Doctoral Education SIG has been an absolute lifesaver for me in terms of CPD and getting established in my new job. At my institution, there are no equivalent roles and I had to look externally from the start. The Doctoral Education SIG has provided that muchneeded community of like-minded colleagues and a supportive space for conversations and professional development across different areas of PGR teaching and support. I feel privileged and inspired to be part of this wonderful community!

We hosted a larger online event in November 2022, a Symposium with the theme ‘Theory-into-practice & Curriculum and materials design: reflective and iterative processes’. For this, Ian Bruce from Waikato University provided an invited plenary paper, ‘Doctoral Education Theory to Practice: A Personal Account’, and we also heard papers from members on the following topics:

• ‘The development and review of an online Education-specific doctoral writing resource’ (Sarah Mattin & Karin Whiteside, Uni versity of Reading),   
• ‘(Re)evaluating reflective tools for doctoral research writers’ (Jenny Skipp, University of Luxembourg),   
• ‘MICUSP for doctoral writing’ (Tatyana Karpenko-Seccombe, University of Huddersfield), and   
• ‘Early career academics (ECAs) in the Social Sciences: Potential learning opportunities in the editorial community of practice’ (Robert Coates, Milan University NASP (Doctoral School of Social Sciences)).

C. Heyns

Video recordings, slides and other resources generated by the coffee meets and symposium are saved and accessible in the SIG's MS Team, and we have thus built up a significant and growing resource for SIG members.

# Future plans

In terms of future directions, at our AGM we agreed to launch two further strands of activity in 2023/24 to compliment the continued coffee meet series:

• ‘Materials share meets’: devoting some meetups to sharing materials, focusing on specific topics, committing to both sharing materials with each other and giving feedback; • A reading caf´e: unlike a reading group, this would be a space to do actual reading, with members coming together each with their own reading, having time to read on their own, and finishing with a group chat on takeaways from the reading.

In terms of scholarship, we have also started to explore the idea of a co-edited SIG-member-authored volume and have bee gathering potential ideas and investigating publishing options for this.

# Contact

To find out more about the Doctoral Education SIG, contact us via email or Twitter:

• Email: doctoralSIG@baleap.org• X: @BALEAP_DocEdSIG

Current committee members are:

Malgorzata (Gosia) Drewniok, University of Lincoln – Secretary, Michelle Evans, University of Leeds – Treasurer, Karin Whiteside, University of Reading – Convenor, Nadya Yakovchuk, University of Surrey – Ordinary Member.

# Acknowledgements

We would like to also take this opportunity to acknowledge ex-committee members, Kate Taylor, University of Leeds, whose original idea it was to found a doctoral-education-focused BALEAP SIG, Feargal Treanor, European University Institute, who helped enormously in getting the SIG off the ground with our 2021 launch, and Tatyana Karpenko-Seccombe, University of Huddersfield, who served as SIG Events Officer until her retirement this month.