The online version of this article can be found at: http://ltr.sagepub.com/content/4/3/193

# Additional services and information for Language Teaching Research can be found at:

Email Alerts: http://ltr.sagepub.com/cgi/alerts Subscriptions: http://ltr.sagepub.com/subscriptions Reprints: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsReprints.nav Permissions: http://www.sagepub.com/journalsPermissions.nav Citations: http://ltr.sagepub.com/content/4/3/193.refs.html

>> Version of Record - Jul 1, 2000 What is This?

# Task-based research and language pedagogy1

Rod Ellis University of Auckland

Two very different theoretical accounts of task-based language use and learning are critiqued and their relevance for language pedagogy discussed. One account, which will be referred to as the psycholinguistic perspective, draws on a computational model of second language (L2) acquisition (Lantolf, 1996). According to this perspective, tasks are viewed as devices that provide learners with the data they need for learning; the design of a task is seen as potentially determining the kind of language use and opportunities for learning that arise. Three different psycholinguistic models are discussed: Long’s Interaction Hypothesis, Skehan’s ‘cognitive approach’ and Yule’s framework of communicative efficiency. The second theoretical account of tasks is that provided by socio-cultural theory. This is premised on the claim that participants coconstruct the ‘activity’ they engage in when performing a task, in accordance with their own socio-history and locally determined goals, and that, therefore, it is difficult to make reliable predictions regarding the kinds of language use and opportunities for learning that will arise. Socio-cultural theory emphasizes the dialogic processes (such as ‘scaffolding’) that arise in a task performance and how these shape language use and learning. Both theoretical approaches afford insights that are of value to task-based language pedagogy. The psycholinguistic approach provides information that is of importance for planning taskbased teaching and learning. The socio-cultural approach illuminates the kinds of improvisation that teachers and learners need to engage in during task-based activity to promote communicative efficiency and L2 acquisition.

# I Introduction

Recent years have seen an enormous growth of interest in taskbased language learning and teaching (see, for example, Skehan,

1998a; Willis, 1996; and Bygate, Skehan and Swain, 2000a). This interest has been motivated to a considerable extent by the fact that ‘task’ is seen as a construct of equal importance to second language acquisition (SLA) researchers and to language teachers (Pica, 1997). ‘Task’ is both a means of clinically eliciting samples of learner language for purposes of research (Corder, 1981) and a device for organizing the content and methodology of language teaching (Prabhu, 1987). However, as Bygate, Skehan and Swain (2000b) point out, ‘task’ is viewed differently depending on whether the perspective is that of research or pedagogy. Researchers, for example, may view a task in terms of a set of variables that impact on performance and language acquisition whereas teachers see it as a unit of work in an overall scheme of work. Of course, there are also points of contact between the two views – for example, information about significant task variables acquired through research can assist teachers in deciding what tasks to use and when.

The purpose of this article is to examine theoretical views of language use, learning and teaching that underlie the work on tasks that has taken place to date. Two broad and disparate views will be identified and discussed. The first of these draws on what Lantolf (1996) has referred to as computational models of second language (L2) acquisition, which treat acquisition as the product of processing input and output. In accordance with this model, researchers have sought to identify ‘psycholinguistically motivated dimensions’ of tasks (Long and Crookes, 1987) – that is, to establish the task features that have a significant impact on the way learners process language in performance and, therefore, potentially, on how they acquire an L2. The identification of such dimensions can be used to select and grade tasks for teaching and learning. The second view is socio-cultural in orientation, drawing on the work of Vygotsky, as this has been applied to L2 learning (see, for example, Lantolf and Appel, 1994; Lantolf, 2000a). This approach views language learning as socially constructed through interaction of one kind or another and, thus, treats ‘tasks’ as workplans that are enacted in accordance with the personal dispositions and goals of individual learners in particular settings, making it difficult to predict the nature of the activity that arises out of a task. This socio-cultural perspective, I will argue, has important implications for how tasks are conceptualized for both research and language pedagogy. In particular, it can contribute to the development of a methodology for task-based teaching and learning.

The article begins with a brief definition of ‘task’. The two theoretical views are then outlined and examples of the research based on each discussed. The article concludes by arguing that language pedagogy needs to take account of both views in order to accommodate what Van Lier (1991) has advanced as the two essential dimensions of teaching – ‘planning’ and ‘improvising’.

# II Defining ‘task’

As Bygate, Skehan and Swain (2000b) point out, definitions of tasks are generally ‘context-free’ and for that reason alone run into problems. Nevertheless, it would seem to me that to operate without some clear idea of the ‘signification’ of ‘task’ and to argue instead that ‘task’ can only be defined in terms of ‘value’2 is not helpful. I shall attempt, therefore, a context-free definition. In so doing, of course, I recognize that ‘task’ will indeed have somewhat different meanings in different contexts of use.

A task is a ‘workplan’; that is, it takes the form of materials for researching or teaching language. A workplan typically involves the following: (1) some input (i.e. information that learners are required to process and use); and (2) some instructions relating to what outcome the learners are supposed to achieve. As Breen (1989) has pointed out, the task-as-workplan is to be distinguished from the task-as-process (i.e. the activity that transpires when particular learners in a particular setting perform the task). As we will see, the activity predicted by the task-as-workplan may or may not accord with the activity that arises from the task-as-process. Definitions of ‘task’ typically relate to task-as-workplan.

At the level of workplan, then, what distinguishes a ‘task’ from an ‘exercise’? Skehan (1998a), reflecting a broad consensus among researchers and educators, suggests four defining criteria:

1. meaning is primary;   
2. there is a goal which needs to be worked towards;   
3. the activity is outcome-evaluated;   
4. there is a real-world relationship (p. 268).

Thus, in a ‘task’ such as Same-or-Different,3 the learners are primarily engaged in trying to communicate content (meaning is primary), they work towards the goal of determining whether the picture they hold is the same as or different to the picture held by their partner, the outcome is evaluated in terms of whether they are successful in this goal, and there is a relationship with the realworld in the sense that the kind of discourse that arises from this task is intended to resemble that which occurs naturally. In contrast, in an ‘exercise’ such as a fill-in-the-blank grammar exercise, the learners are primarily engaged in producing correct linguistic forms, there is no obvious communicative goal to be achieved, the outcome is evaluated in terms of whether the learners’ answers are grammatically correct or not, and no direct relationship between the type of language activity involved and naturally occurring discourse is intended.

Widdowson (1998a) is critical of such a definition of ‘task’, arguing that the ‘criteria do not in themselves distinguish the linguistic exercise and the communicative task’ (p. 328). Widdowson argues that ‘exercise’ and ‘task’ differ with regard to the kind of meaning, goal, and outcome they are directed towards. Thus, an exercise is premised on the need to develop linguistic skills as a prerequisite for the learning of communicative abilities, while a task is based on the assumption that linguistic abilities are developed through communicative activity. Widdowson suggests that what constitutes the primary focus of attention, the goal, the way in which the outcome is evaluated and the relationship to the real-world are all interpreted differently in accordance with this basic difference in orientation. In effect, however, Widdowson is not so much disagreeing with Skehan’s definition as, with his customary elegance, refining it. Table 1 is an attempt to incorporate Widdowson’s insight into Skehan’s definition.

A possible objection to this conceptualization of ‘exercise’ and ‘task’ is that teachers and learners in a classroom context are unlikely to forget the overarching reason for any activity they engage in, namely, to learn the language. In other words, it can be claimed that the achievement of a communicative goal will always be subservient to a learning agenda. Such a claim, reasonable as it seems, needs to be subjected to empirical investigation. But irrespective of whether it is valid or not, it does not preclude the need for the kind of theoretical distinction between ‘exercise’ and ‘task’ outlined in Table 1. No matter what the actual behaviour that arises when teachers and learners perform an exercise or task is, there is a need to distinguish ‘exercise’ and ‘task’ at the level of workplan. The extent to which workplans and actual behaviour are matched remains an issue of obvious importance but cannot be studied unless clearly defined categories of workplan are established.

Table 1 Distinguishing ‘exercise’ and ‘task’ (based on Skehan, 1998a, b)   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Exercise</td><td></td><td>Task</td></tr><tr><td>Orientation</td><td>Linguistic skills viewed as pre- requisite for learning communicative abilities.</td><td>Linguistic skills are developed through engaging in communicative activity.</td></tr><tr><td>Focus</td><td>Linguistic form and semantic meaning (&#x27;focus on form&#x27;).</td><td>Propositional content and pragmatic communicative meaning (&#x27;focus on meaning&#x27;).4</td></tr><tr><td>Goal</td><td>Manifestation of code knowledge.</td><td>Achievement of a communicative goal.</td></tr><tr><td>Outcome- evaluation</td><td>Performance evaluated in terms of conformity to the code.</td><td>Performance evaluated in terms of whether the communicative goal has been achieved..</td></tr><tr><td>Real-world relationship</td><td>Internalization of linguistic skills serves as an investment for future use.</td><td>There is a direct and obvious relationship between the activity that arises from the task and natural communicative activity.</td></tr></table></body></html>

# III Task from a psycholinguistic perspective

From a psycholinguistic5 perspective a task is a device that guides learners to engage in certain types of information-processing that are believed to be important for effective language use and/or for language acquisition from some theoretical standpoint. This perspective is predictive, and, in some cases, deterministic. That is, it assumes that there are properties in a task that will predispose, even induce, learners to engage in certain types of language use and mental processing that are beneficial to acquisition. As

Skehan, Foster and Mehnert (1998) put it ‘task properties have a significant impact on the nature of performance’ (p. 245). The claim is, therefore, that there is a close correlation between the task-asworkplan and the task-as-process because the activity that results from the task-as-workplan is predictable from the design features of the task. As I will later argue, such a view constitutes both a strength and a weakness where language pedagogy is concerned. I believe, therefore, that it needs to be acknowledged but also challenged, not least because of its current dominance in taskbased research and pedagogy.

The underlying theoretical position adopted by task-based researchers who work in this tradition derives from what Lantolf (1996) has called the ‘computational metaphor’. Lantolf sees Chomsky as the person most responsible for the dominance of this metaphor in linguistics and applied linguistics since the 1960s but recognizes that it is evident in cognitive as well as nativist accounts of language learning. He comments: ‘it quickly became regularized as theory within the cognitive science of the 1970s and 1980s. Mainstream cognitive science so strongly believes in the metaphor – in effect, to be in mainstream cognitive science means that many people find it difficult to conceive of neural computation as a theory, it must surely be a fact’ (p. 724–5).

It is not surprising, therefore, that this metaphor underlies the work on task-based learning/teaching of Long (1989), Skehan (1996), and Yule (1997), among others, all of whom view tasks as devices for manipulating how learners process language. Tasks, in other words, are seen as the external means by which we can influence the mental computations that learners make. These computations determine how effectively they communicate and how they acquire language.

Within this basic metaphor, it is possible to distinguish a number of different theoretical positions. I will briefly consider three here. The first, which was prominent in research in the 1980s and continues to attract attention, albeit in somewhat revised form, is Long’s Interaction Hypothesis. The second is Skehan’s ‘cognitive approach’, based on the distinction between two types of processing that learners can engage in (lexical processing and rulebased processing). Skehan’s theoretical position has informed a number of studies carried out in the 1990s. The third is Yule’s model of communicative effectiveness, which has attracted less attention, but is of obvious promise where language pedagogy is concerned.

# 1 The Interaction Hypothesis

In its early form (Long, 1983), the Interaction Hypothesis claimed that acquisition is facilitated when learners obtain comprehensible input as a result of the opportunity to negotiate meaning when communication breakdown occurs. In its later form (Long, 1996), the theory has been extended to take account of other ways in which meaning negotiation can contribute to L2 acquisition, namely through the feedback that learners receive on their own productions when they attempt to communicate and through the modified output that arises when learners are pushed to reformulate their productions to make them comprehensible. In the later version, then, meaning negotiation serves to draw learners’ attention to linguistic form in the context of a primary focus-on-meaning and in so doing induces the ‘noticing’ that has been claimed necessary for acquisition to take place (Schmidt, 1990).

It follows from the Interaction Hypothesis, whether in its early or late form, that what is important for acquisition is the opportunity for learners to engage in meaning negotiation. Meaning negotiation serves as the means by which learners’ ‘data needs’ (Pica, 1996) can be effectively met. It should be noted, however, that, with the exception of a few studies (e.g. Ellis, Tanaka and Yamazaki, 1994; Ellis and He, 1999; Mackey, 1999), there is little empirical evidence to demonstrate that negotiation promotes acquisition.

A question that has attracted the attention of research informed by the Interaction Hypothesis is how opportunities for meaning negotiation can be provided. Clearly, there are many factors that can bear on this question, including those relating to the setting, the learner and the tasks that learners are asked to perform. We will be concerned only with research that has investigated the latter set of factors. This research has sought to identify the task dimensions that impact on meaning negotiation and thereby to develop a psycholinguistic basis for the classification of tasks (e.g.

Pica, Kanagy and Falodun, 1993).

Drawing on research to date, Table 2 below indicates somewhat crudely, which task characteristics are likely to have a ‘more positive’ and a ‘less positive’ effect on the quantity of meaning negotiation likely to take place. It suggests that the kinds of interactional modifications hypothesized to contribute to L2 acquisition are likely to be more frequent in tasks that: (1) have a required information exchange; (2) involve a two-way (as opposed to one-way) exchange of information; (3) have a closed outcome; (4) are not familiar to the interactants; (5) involve a human/ethical type problem; (6) involve a narrative discourse mode; and (7) are context-free (in the sense that the task does not provide contextual support for communication) and involve considerable detail. This summary is based on a detailed survey of the research (see Ellis, forthcoming). One problem with this research is that it provides little information relating to how the different dimensions shown in Table 2 interact in the impact they have on meaning negotiation. Typically, the research has compared tasks with regard to a single task dimension (e.g. the effect of a two-way as opposed to a oneway information gap). It is likely, of course, that the various dimensions interact in complex ways, with some combinations having a greater influence on negotiation than others.

Table 2 Task dimensions hypothesized to promote meaning negotiation   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Task dimensions</td><td>More positive</td><td>Less positive</td></tr><tr><td>Information</td><td>Required (information- gap)</td><td>Optional (opinion-gap)</td></tr><tr><td>exchange Information</td><td>Two-way</td><td>One-way</td></tr><tr><td>gap</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Outcome</td><td>Closed</td><td>Open</td></tr><tr><td>Task</td><td>Non-familiar</td><td>Familiar</td></tr><tr><td>familiarity</td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Topic</td><td>Human/ethical.</td><td>Objective/spatial</td></tr><tr><td>Discourse domain</td><td>Narrative</td><td>Description/expository</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td></td></tr><tr><td>Cognitive</td><td>Context-free;</td><td>Context-dependent;</td></tr><tr><td>complexity</td><td>detailed information</td><td>less-detailed information</td></tr></table></body></html>

A somewhat different but related approach to investigating tasks is that followed by Swain in her recent work. She bases her approach on the role that output can play in L2 acquisition, a role which Long (1996) has incorporated into his revised Interaction Hypothesis. Swain (1985; 1995) suggests that output serves to help learners notice gaps in their linguistic knowledge and thus triggers both analysis of input and of their own existing internal resources (but see Swain and Lapkin, this issue, for a significant development to this approach). In addition it provides a means by which learners can test hypotheses about the L2 and reflect on their own and the interlocutors’ use of language. In accordance with this theoretical position, Swain and her co-researchers have examined how tasks impact on ‘language related episodes’ (i.e. occasions where linguistic form is explicitly discussed by learners). Such episodes arise when learners temporarily attend to form in the context of performing a task. They involve what might be called the ‘negotiation of form’ – an attempt to determine collaboratively which form to use in order to express meaning accurately and coherently. Such negotiation is directed at the achievement of a communicative goal, not at conformity to the code for its own sake, and, therefore, lies within the kind of behaviour a ‘task’ is intended to elicit (see Table 1). The results of Swain’s research to date, however, are not very encouraging; Swain and Lapkin (2000) found no major task differences in the degree of attention that L2 learners paid to form.6

# 2 A ‘cognitive approach’ to tasks

In recent years, Skehan (1998b) has developed what he calls a ‘cognitive approach’ to support his empirical investigations of tasks. This approach is based on a distinction in the way in which learners are believed to represent L2 knowledge. Learners (like native speakers) construct both an exemplar-based system and a rule-based system. The former is lexical in nature and includes both discrete lexical items and, importantly, ready-made formulaic chunks of language. The linguistic knowledge contained in this system can be easily and quickly accessed and thus is ideally suited for occasions calling for fluent language performance. The rulebased system consists of abstract representations of the underlying patterns of the language. They require more processing and thus are best suited for more controlled, less fluent language performance. They are needed when learners have to creatively construct utterances to express meaning precisely or in sociolinguistically appropriate ways. The distinction between these two types of linguistic knowledge is now broadly acknowledged in cognitive psychology (see, for example, N. Ellis, 1996).

Whereas the task-based research originating from the Interaction Hypothesis has focused on meaning negotiation, Skehan’s research has examined learner production. Skehan distinguishes three aspects of production: (1) fluency (i.e. the capacity of the learner to mobilize his/her system to communicate in real time); (2) accuracy (i.e. the ability of the learner to perform in accordance with target language norms); and (3) complexity (i.e. the utilization of interlanguage structures that are ‘cutting edge’, elaborate and structured). Skehan suggests that language users vary in the extent to which they emphasize fluency, accuracy or complexity, with some tasks predisposing them to focus on fluency, others on accuracy and yet others on complexity. These different aspects of production draw on different systems of language. Fluency requires learners to draw on their memory-based system, accessing and deploying ready-made chunks of language, and, when problems arise, using communication strategies to get by. In contrast, accuracy and, in particular, complexity are achieved by learners drawing on their rule-based system and thus require syntactic processing. Skehan argues that it may be possible to influence different aspects of language acquisition (i.e. fluency, accuracy and complexity) by providing opportunities for learners to engage in different types of production.

The research based on Skehan’s ‘cognitive account’ has, therefore, been directed at discovering what task variables predispose learners to emphasize fluency, accuracy or complexity in their productions. These task variables can be divided into two broad groups: (1) task features and (2) task implementation. Table 3 summarizes the results of Skehan’s and others’ research to date. Skehan (1998a), in a review of task-based research, acknowledges that the various task variables referred to in Table 3 can potentially interact in complex ways to influence learner production and that currently little is known about these interactions. However, he is optimistic that with further research, ‘greater precision of influence’ can be established.

Table 3 Effects of task variables on the fluency, accuracy and complexity of learner   

<html><body><table><tr><td colspan="2">Task variables</td><td>Main findings</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>A. Task features 1. Extent to which task involves</td><td>Promotes fluency</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>well-structured information 2. Number of elements to be</td><td>More elements result in greater</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>manipulated 3. Decision-making tasks requiring</td><td>complexity Greater differentiation results in greater</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>differentiated responses</td><td>complexity</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>B. Task variables 1. Planning time</td><td>Planning time results in greater</td></tr><tr><td></td><td></td><td>complexity and, sometimes, greater accuracy; different types and amounts of planning time differentially affect complexity and accuracy</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>2. Task repetition</td><td>Asking learners to repeat a task results in more complex language production</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>4. Simultaneous vs. subsequent task performance</td><td>Accuracy and complexity greater in subsequent task performance</td></tr><tr><td></td><td>5. Knowledge of subsequent public task performance</td><td>In some tasks, this resulted in greater accuracy</td></tr></table></body></html>

Skehan’s research assumes that learners possess a limited processing capacity such that trade-offs between fluency, accuracy and complexity are likely to occur. However, other cognitive models are premised on a multiple-resources view of processing – that is, that learners, like native speakers, have the capacity to attend to more than one aspect of language and language processing at the same time. Such models have also informed taskbased research. Robinson (see Robinson, 1995; Robinson, Ting and Unwin, 1996), for example, makes use of a multiple-resources view of processing to try to identify the differential complexity of tasks. One of the design features he has investigated is the availability of contextual support in the performance of a task, the hypothesis being that tasks that do not provide such support will be more complex than those that do because they make parallel attention to form and message more difficult. The results to date, however, are inconclusive. The problem, as Skehan and Foster (2000) have pointed out, is that there is no single, general measure of task performance that can be used to determine whether one task is more complex than another. As Skehan’s own research shows and as Robinson’s research seems to bear out, a task may be difficult in terms of one aspect of language use (e.g. a measure of linguistic accuracy) but relatively easy in terms of another (e.g. a measure of fluency). This finding, then, is more supportive of a limited processing view of capacity than of a multiple-resources view.

# 3 Communicative effectiveness

Whereas research based on both the Interaction/Output Hypothesis and Skehan’s ‘cognitive approach’ is oriented towards identifying those task features that result in learner production of potential importance for L2 acquisition, Yule’s research has been directed at examining task-processes that contribute to communicative effectiveness. The extent to which task design and implementation impacts on the skilfulness of L2 learners’ performance (as opposed to their competence) is seen, quite legitimately, as an important target for research in its own right.

We have seen that a defining feature of a ‘task’ is that it is outcome-evaluated in the sense that the success or failure of the task is determined by whether the learners achieve the goal of the task (e.g. establishing whether two pictures are the same or different). Building on this feature, Yule has proposed a theory of communicative effectiveness for referential tasks of the Same-orDifferent kind. Yule (1997) distinguishes two broad dimensions of communicative effectiveness: (1) the identification-of-referent dimension and (2) the role-taking dimension. Learners need to be able to encode the referents they have to communicate about. They require the perceptual ability to notice specific attributes of the referent, the comparison ability to distinguish one referent from another, and the linguistic ability needed to encode the referent in such a way that it is sufficiently distinguished from other referents. The role-taking dimension concerns the ability of the participants to take account of their communicative partners in order to achieve intersubjectivity. They must be able to recognize the importance of the other speaker’s perspective, to make inferences about the other speaker’s perspective, to take these inferences into account when encoding a message and to attend to the feedback provided by the other speakers in order to monitor output accordingly.

Yule bases his study of communicative effectiveness on an analysis of communicative outcomes. This goes beyond simply identifying whether the task participants have successfully accomplished a task. Yule and Powers (1994) propose a framework for the micro-analysis of communicative outcomes based on how specific referential problems are solved (see Table 4). The advantage of this framework is that it provides information about how participants set about dealing with the various referential problems that arise in performing a task.

This framework has been used in research aimed at identifying the impact of task variables on communicative outcomes. Yule, Powers and McDonald (1992), for example, used the framework to compare learners’ performance on two similar map tasks in each of which one learner had to describe a route drawn on a map to a second learner whose map did not show the route. The tasks contained built-in referential problems in that the maps the learners used were not identical. The study showed that the learners favoured non-negotiated solutions in the first task but negotiated solutions in the second task. This study, then, indicates

1. No problem: a referential problem exists but is not identified.

2. Non-negotiated solutions:

a. Unacknowledged problem: a problem is identified by the receiver but not acknowledged by the sender.   
b. Abandon responsibility: a problem is acknowledged by the sender, but responsibility is not taken for solving it.   
c. Arbitrary solution: a problem is acknowledged by the sender who solves it arbitrarily, ignoring the receiver’s contribution.

3. Negotiated solutions

a. Other-centred solution: the sender tries to solve the problem based on the receiver’s (and the sender’s) perspective.   
b. Self-centred solution: the sender tries to solve the problem by making the receiver’s perspective fit the sender’s.

that repeating a task not only results in greater communicative efficiency but also affects the kind of strategies learners use to tackle referential problems. It is also likely that tasks vary in terms of the ease with which participants can achieve communicative effectiveness and that this may serve as a way of measuring task complexity. Brown (1995), for example, reports that native speakers of English found it easier to perform a task that required the participants to simply ‘utilize an interpretation’, as was the case in the kind of map task used in Yule’s research, than a task where the participants had to ‘construct an interpretation’, as in a storytelling task involving events that were capable of more than one interpretation.

As should be clear from this brief account of Yule’s theory, communicative effectiveness is determined not just by the nature of the task but also by learner factors, such as personality and cognitive style. The content of a task impacts on the identificationof-referent dimension while learner factors are involved in the role-taking dimension. In acknowledging the importance of the learner’s contribution to the activity that arises from a task, and given that the first dimension can only be communicated through the second dimension, Yule’s theory of task performance goes beyond that of both the Interaction/Output Hypothesis and Skehan’s cognitive approach. However, to date, there have been few studies examining the impact of task design and implementation on communicative effectiveness. Also, the question of how task performance might contribute to the development of communicative effectiveness has not been addressed. As it stands, therefore, Yule’s model may be of greater applicability to performance testing than to task-based teaching.

# 4 Evaluating the psycholinguistic perspective

The strength of the psycholinguistic perspective is that it has served to identify features of task design and task implementation with the potential to impact on L2 performance and L2 acquisition. The approach adopted has been as follows:

1. Determine what effect task variables have on task performance. 2. Draw on a theory of L2 acquisition/communicative effectiveness to make claims regarding the relationship between specific

types of language performance and L2 acquisition/ communicative effectiveness. 3. Infer which kinds of tasks will work best for promoting L2 acquisition/communicative effectiveness.

As Skehan (1998a) has pointed out, the inherent weakness of this approach lies in the failure to show a direct relationship between task-design and L2 acquisition (or, I would add, between task-design and the development of communicative efficiency). This arises because the research to date has been invariably crosssectional in design. Skehan’s solution is to examine the relationship between task and L2 acquisition longitudinally. However, this solution ignores the problem of controlling for the myriad factors that impact on acquisition/communicative efficiency, over and above those involved in the design and implementation of the tasks the learners are asked to perform. The extent to which it is possible to identify empirically which kinds of tasks work best for acquisition/communicative efficiency is clearly problematic. One solution is to design tasks that incorporate specific linguistic features which learners have not yet acquired, as in Ellis, Tanaka and Yamazaki (1994). This will make it possible to determine what effect the design of a task has on the acquisition of these features.

The psycholinguistic perspective suffers from another drawback. There is an inherent problem in examining tasks without any consideration of other general factors that are bound to influence the task performance. For one thing, task performance, as Yule has acknowledged, depends not just on the nature of the task but also on learner factors (such as those involved in the role-taking dimension of task performance). Another dimension that researchers in the psycholinguistic tradition have paid scant attention to is the setting. For example, it cannot be assumed that tasks performed in a pseudo-laboratory-type setting (as has been the case with much of the research to date) will be performed in the same way as tasks performed in the classroom (see Foster, 1998). Also, the same task performed with the whole class can result in a very different activity to that which arises when the task is performed in pairs or small groups (see Ellis and He, 1999). Similarly, the same task might also result in very different kinds of activity depending on the role that the teacher plays in the interactions that arise at various stages of a lesson (see Samuda, 2000). Further, the nature of the activities learners engage in before they perform a task can impact on their performance (see note 5). In short, a psycholinguistic approach to investigating tasks would have to take account of these other factors. It would have to demonstrate how task factors interact with them. Given the complexity of these interactions it may prove very difficult to arrive at ecologically valid generalizations about the effect task variables have on learner performance. In the view of some (e.g. Coughlan and Duff, 1994; Platt and Brooks, 1994), this invalidates the psycholinguistic perspective on tasks. I will take a different view but first we will explore an alternative paradigm for examining the relationship between tasks and acquisition, one that views the activity that arises when learners perform a task from a constructivist perspective.

# IV Task from a socio-cultural perspective

The perspective on tasks I shall now explore draws on sociocultural theory, as this has grown out of the work of Vygotsky (1986) and Leont’ev (1981), among others. I shall not attempt to present this complex theory in detail here – readers are referred to summaries provided by Lantolf (1994) and Lantolf and Appel (2000b). Instead, I shall focus on how this theory has been applied to understanding the way learners make sense of the tasks they are asked to perform and how they learn from them.

One of the central claims of socio-cultural theory is that participants always co-construct the activity they engage in, in accordance with their own socio-history and locally determined goals. As Appel and Lantolf (1994) point out ‘performance depends crucially on the interaction of individual and task’ rather than on the inherent properties of the task itself. Implicit in sociocultural accounts of tasks is the view that the same task can result in very different kinds of activity when performed by the same learners at different times. Coughlan and Duff (1994) distinguish between what they call ‘task’ (i.e. the workplan) and ‘activity’ (i.e. the actual language that occurs when learners perform the task). In a study of one Cambodian ESL learner, they were able to demonstrate that the same task (a picture description task) was performed very differently on two separate occasions. They also showed that the way another type of learner – EFL students in a Hungarian secondary school – performed the task was, again, entirely different. Coughlan and Duff show how an entire range of discourse types arose from this task reflecting their subjects’ multiple interpretations of it. They conclude that ‘task’ cannot be treated as a constant in research as ‘the activity it generates will be unique’ (p. 191). Other studies (e.g. Platt and Brooks, 1994; Foster, 1998) lend support to such a conclusion.

In order to perform a task, the learners have to ‘interpret’ it. This is reflected in the effort that learners put into orientating to the task and establishing their goals for performing it. Brooks and Donato (1994), for example, show that even though the teacher carefully explained the task goals to third-year high school learners of L2 Spanish, the participants engaged in extensive metatalk about the task (typically in the L1) to establish the goals and to orient themselves to how they might accomplish them. They show that particular students hit on quite unique ways of performing the task (e.g. numbering the squares on a matrix sheet to enable them to identify where specific objects needed to be placed on it). Other studies have shown how learners’ orientation can change during the performance of a task. Appel and Lantolf (1994), for example, showed how learners re-orientated themselves from ‘recalling’ to ‘retelling’ at a certain stage in an oral narrative task.

According to socio-cultural theory, learning arises not through interaction but in interaction. Learners first succeed in performing a new function with the assistance of another person and then internalize this function so that they can perform it unassisted. In this way, social interaction mediates learning. The theory has gone some way to specifying the kinds of interactions that most successfully mediate learning. They are those in which the new functions are ‘scaffolded’ by the participants. Scaffolding7 is the dialogic process by which one speaker assists another to perform a new function. According to Wood, Bruner and Ross (1976), it can involve recruiting interest in the task, simplifying the task as necessary, maintaining pursuit of the goal of the task, marking critical features and discrepancies between what has been produced and the ideal solution, controlling frustration during problem solving and demonstrating an idealized version of the act to be performed.

Task-based research in the socio-cultural tradition has been directed at demonstrating how scaffolding, so defined, helps learners achieve a successful task outcome. Donato (1994), for example, describes the collective scaffolding employed by groups of university students performing an oral task. He shows how one group of learners is able to produce a particular grammatical construction jointly even though none of the students individually knew it. He also provides evidence to suggest that language acquisition was taking place. The performance of new grammatical constructions on one occasion was frequently followed by the independent use of them by individual learners on a later occasion. Recent studies by Swain (e.g. Swain and Lapkin, 1998) also testify to learners’ ability to internalize grammatical features that they initially constructed collaboratively through dialogue when performing a task. Samuda (2000) shows how a teacher created the conditions for students to uptake a new grammatical feature (the modal verb ‘may’) through implicit scaffolding but also, interestingly, that the students did not in fact use the new feature in their own speech until the teacher provided a much more explicit account. Both the teacher’s implicit and explicit focus occurred in the context in performing the same communicative task. Samuda does not discuss her study from a socio-cultural perspective. However, her insistence on the need to view tasks in relation to how teachers shape opportunities for learning rather than as objective instruments for providing opportunities is reflective of such a perspective.

Socio-cultural theory, then, offers a very different perspective on tasks. Whereas researchers in the psycholinguistic tradition have emphasised the role of the inherent task properties on performance and acquisition, socio-cultural researchers have focused on how tasks are accomplished by learners and teachers and how the process of accomplishing them might contribute to language acquisition. They view the learners, the teacher and the setting in which they interact as just as important as the task itself. They reject attempts to externally define and classify tasks on the grounds that the ‘activity’ that derives from a task cannot be predicted from the task itself. They focus instead on how task participants achieve intersubjectivity with regard to goals and procedures and on how they collaborate to scaffold each other’s attempt to perform functions that lie outside their individual abilities. Such a perspective is both persuasive and informative, as is reflected in Swain’s recent adoption of socio-cultural theory in her own research. Swain (2000) argues that a constructionist account of tasks is needed to understand how learning arises out of performance.

It is also, at least in the current state of research, a perspective with some noteworthy limitations. As in psycholinguistically oriented research on tasks, researchers in the socio-cultural tradition have concentrated on describing the social interactions that arise when learners perform tasks and have made little attempt to demonstrate if these interactions contribute to acquisition.8 In part this is a product of equating ‘use’ with ‘acquisition’ (i.e. what learners have been shown to do in interaction is taken as evidence of internalization). In part, it is the result of the same problem facing psycholinguistic task-based research – the lack of a longitudinal dimension. Also, in rejecting the deterministic view of tasks that underlies some of the research in the psycholinguistic tradition (see, for example, Long, 1989), socio-cultural researchers have failed to acknowledge that task features and variables do impact on task performance, albeit in ways that may defy precise specification. It should be noted, however, that socio-cultural theory per se does not preclude recognizing the role played by task variables. Variation in task design is equivalent to variation in the artifact, which, according to socio-cultural theory impacts on how the artifact is deployed. This problem, then, is not inherent in the theory but rather reflects the way the theory has been taken up in task-based research. It could be argued that Samuda (2000), in the study referred to above, shows how a socio-cultural perspective might accommodate attention to the design of tasks. Samuda acknowledges the importance of examining the task and teacher ‘in action’ but also illustrates how a task can be designed to create a ‘semantic space’ so as to provide opportunities for learners to use a specifically targeted grammatical feature. In accepting that learners coconstruct task-based activity, it is not necessary to reject entirely the claim that task design impacts on that activity.

# V Tasks in language pedagogy

I would now like to turn to how these different conceptualizations of ‘task’ can inform task-based language pedagogy. I shall attempt this by making two distinctions. The first concerns the ‘goal’ of task-based instruction, namely whether this is ‘communicative effectiveness’ or ‘L2 acquisition’. I shall argue that task-based language pedagogy has paid insufficient attention to this distinction. The second concerns the two dimensions of teaching identified by Van Lier (1991) – ‘planning’ and ‘improvising’. I shall argue that the two perspectives on tasks discussed in the preceding sections of this paper are differentially relevant to these dimensions.

Task-based language instruction has a number of purposes. Willis (1996: 35–6) identifies eight:

1. to give learners confidence in trying out whatever language they know;   
2. to give learners experience of spontaneous interaction;   
3. to give learners the chance to benefit from noticing how others express similar meanings;   
4. to give learners chances for negotiating turns to speak;   
5. to engage learners in using language purposefully and cooperatively;   
6. to make learners participate in a complete interaction, not just one-off sentences;   
7. to give learners chances to try out communication strategies; and   
8. to develop learners’ confidence that they can achieve communicative goals.

These purposes relate to two general goals: communicative effectiveness and L2 acquisition. Interestingly, seven of Willis’s purposes relate primarily to communicative effectiveness; only one, (3), relates specifically to L2 acquisition. This reflects, perhaps, the general perception among language teachers and educators that task-based instruction is mainly directed at improving students’ abilities to use the target language rather than at enabling them to acquire new linguistic skills (see Samuda, 2000). It contrasts with the orientation of SLA researchers such as Long, Skehan and

Swain, whose primary concern is how tasks can contribute to language acquisition.

The theoretical perspectives that have been discussed in the previous section suggest that there is a need to distinguish between task-based performance that contributes to effective language use and that which facilitates L2 acquisition. That is, it cannot be assumed that achieving communicative effectiveness in the performance of a task will set up the interactive conditions that promote L2 acquisition. Students may succeed in performing a task successfully without the need to participate in much meaning negotiation or the need to attend to linguistic form. In so doing, they may emphasize fluency over accuracy or complexity by drawing on their lexicalized system, thus failing to stretch their interlanguage systems. The task may not confront them with the need to collaborate in the joint construction of new knowledge. Similarly, tasks that are directed at improving students’ communicative abilities – for example, by promoting confidence in using language or by providing opportunities for trying out communication strategies – may fail to develop their linguistic skills. It follows that teachers and language educators need to give more attention to the properties of tasks that respectively aim to promote communicative efficiency and L2 acquisition. In this respect, Skehan’s cognitive approach and Yule’s theory of communicative effectiveness appear most promising. Yule’s theory provides a basis for evaluating the kinds of tasks that contribute to developing communicative effectiveness, while Skehan’s work suggests the kinds of tasks that are needed to promote accuracy/complexity and, thereby, potentially to influence language acquisition.

Implicit in this argument, however, is the assumption that it is possible to predict with some degree of certainty what kind of language performance will result from specific tasks. It is precisely, this claim, however, that research based on socio-cultural theory has challenged. If it is not possible to establish how students will behave when asked to perform particular tasks, then, clearly it is not possible to design a task-based syllabus based on such constructs as meaning negotiation, fluency, accuracy, and complexity or communicative effectiveness. Put simply, if the position adopted by some socio-cultural researchers is accepted, there is no basis for the selection or grading of tasks other, perhaps, than the very general idea that a task should afford opportunities for students to perform functions collaboratively that they have not yet fully internalized (i.e. functions that lie within their zone of proximal development).

There, are, however, good reasons for dismissing this argument. First, while acknowledging that task performances are necessarily always constructed rather than determined, recognition can be given to the propensity of certain tasks to lead to particular types of language behaviour. As I pointed out above, such a position is not, in fact, incompatible with socio-cultural theory. There is sufficient research to demonstrate that such variables as the inherent structure of a task, the availability of planning time and the opportunity to repeat a task have certain probabilistic process outcomes. Second, given the strong theoretical rationale for taskbased courses, teachers need to be able to design such courses. Thus, they need to take principled decisions about what kinds of tasks to include in the course, the balance of the different types of task, and the sequencing of the tasks. As Corder (1980) pointed out long ago, teachers cannot wait until researchers have resolved their differences – they must get on with the practical task of teaching. It is reasonable to suggest, therefore, that they should draw on the available research to help them in their planning decisions.

Van Lier (1991; 1996) suggests that planning is one of two dimensions of teaching, the other being ‘improvisation’ (i.e. the actual behaviours that arise during the process of a lesson which have not been planned for). He sees both as important for a teacher’s professionalism. Any lesson needs to achieve a balance between these two dimensions. He writes:

The term ‘balanced’ suggests that in most cases a lesson which is so tightly planned (and implemented) that there is no room at all for improvisation, and conversely, a lesson which is not planned at all and therefore entirely improvised, would generally be considered unbalanced and perhaps not entirely effective.

(Van Lier, 1996: 200)

‘Balanced’ teaching involves teachers moving back and forwards between planned and improvised decision-making in the course of a lesson. Van Lier, of course, is talking about teaching in general but the distinction is of obvious relevance to task-based language pedagogy.

Research in the psycholinguistic tradition of Long, Skehan and Yule has an obvious role to play in the ‘planning’ dimension of language teaching. It provides information that can be used to select and grade tasks to suit the needs of particular groups of learners. In other words, it can assist in the design of task-based courses. It can also help guide general methodological decisions, such as when and when not to provide learners with opportunities to plan before performing a task, what kind of planning to require of them or whether to repeat a task. In contrast, research in the socio-cultural tradition can make teachers aware that the activity that arises from a task may not be exactly what was planned and that this is not a consequence of poor planning or bad teaching but of the participants adapting the task to their own purposes. It can also help to illuminate how teachers can improvise in order to construct activity from tasks in ways that promote the development of linguistic abilities and skills. In particular, it illustrates the processes involved in determining task goals, establishing intersubjectivity and scaffolding learners’ attempts to perform beyond their current level. Such illustrations can serve an awareness-raising function, enabling teachers (and learners) to see the kind of strategies that can be exploited to co-construct activity relevant to their goals. For example, it might help teachers to see when to provide an ‘implicit’ and ‘explicit focus’ on form in the performance of a task (see Samuda, 2000).

From a pedagogic perspective, then, the two research traditions need not be seen as incompatible. Rather they mutually inform task-based instruction. Van Lier argues that teachers need to develop a ‘dual vision’ – to keep in mind both a long-term sense of direction and the need to make on-line decisions that take account of the exigencies of the moment. Such a vision will need to draw on a variety of theoretical perspectives and the research they give rise to. The goal of a pedagogically relevant programme of task-based research must be to address both the planning and improvising dimensions of teaching. This can be achieved if researchers eschew the temptation to promote their own preferred approach to researching tasks at the expense of other approaches (a clear tendency in some socio-cultural researchers such as Platt and Brooks 1994), and, instead, accept the need for a pluralistic research agenda capable of addressing the multi-faceted nature of task-based instruction.

Notes   
1 This article is based on a paper that was given at the AILA Conference in Tokyo, Japan in 1999. I would like to thank Martin Bygate, Jim Lantolf and two anonymous reviewers for comments on this paper, many of which have been incorporated into the present article.   
2 The distinction between ‘signification’ and ‘value’ is Widdowson’s (1978). ‘Signification’ relates to ‘usage’, as this is represented in works of reference such as a dictionary or a grammar. ‘Value’ relates to the actual meaning a linguistic item takes on when it is used in communication.   
3 A Same-or-Different task typically consists of one or more pairs of pictures. Working in pairs, learners are asked to describe the picture they are holding, which their partner cannot see, in order to decide whether it is the same as or different from their partner’s.   
4 Widdowson (1998b) also takes issue with the widely used distinction between a ‘focus on form’ and a ‘focus on meaning’, arguing that it is fundamentally mistaken because ‘meaning’ (at least ‘semantic meaning’) has always been a part of what SLA researchers refer to as a ‘focus on form’. However, Widdowson rather misses the point. The contrast SLA researchers wish to make is between a ‘focus on form’ as attention to linguistic forms and the semantic meanings they can potentially realize, and a ‘focus on meaning’ as attempts to use language pragmatically to convey messages in context. This, of course, is precisely the distinction Widdowson himself makes when he talks of ‘usage’ and ‘use’.   
5 The use of the term ‘psycholinguistic’ here refers to the computational view of language acquisition. In fact, as Jim Lantolf has pointed out to me (personal correspondence), socio-cultural theory is also ‘psycholinguistic’ in that it purports to account for mental activity. However, socio-cultural theory is not concerned solely with mental activity but rather views social and mental activity as seamlessly related. It would seem appropriate, therefore, to reserve the term ‘psycholinguistic’ to refer to ‘black box’ models of learning of the kind referred to in this section and to look for other terms to describe models that emphasize the role of social activity in learning.   
6 Swain and Lapkin’s (2000) study compared the language-related episodes that resulted from a jigsaw task and a dicto-gloss task (where students listened to a text, took notes, and then tried to reconstruct it). Both tasks were preceded by a mini-lesson on the targeted grammatical structure and both tasks involved the production of a written text. Swain and Lapkin suggest that these commonalities may explain why the tasks did not result in any differences in attention to form. In this respect, the study is illustrative of a general problem

with research directed at investigating the effects of task type on language performance; the sequence of activities that tasks are embedded in may have a more significant effect on performance than the design of the tasks themselves.

7 The term ‘scaffolding’ also figures in research based on the Interaction Hypothesis. However, it is used in a much more limited sense to refer to the way in which learners build syntactic constructions vertically over several turns. In socio-cultural theory, ‘scaffolding’ is used to refer to the interactional, social and affective support that one interactant gives another.   
8 In this respect, Swain’s recent research is an exception. Swain has attempted to show how learners’ dialogic construction of a task can lead to acquisition of new L2 forms.

# VII References

Appel, G. and Lantolf, J. 1994: Speaking as mediation: a study of L1 and L2 text recall tasks. The Modern Language Journal 78: 437–52.   
Breen, M. 1989. The evaluation cycle for language learning. In Johnson, R.K., editor, The second language curriculum. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Brooks, F.B. and Donato, R. 1994: Vygotskyan approaches to understanding foreign language learner discourse during communication tasks. Hispania 77: 262–74.   
Brown, G. 1995: Speaker, listeners and communication. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Bygate, M., Skehan, P. and Swain, M., editors, 2000a: Researching pedagogic tasks: second language learning, teaching and testing. Harlow, Essex: Longman.   
Bygate, M., Skehan, P. and Swain, M., editors, 2000b: Introduction. In Bygate, M. et al. (editors).   
Corder, S.P. 1980: Second language acquisition research and the teaching of grammar. BAAL Newsletter 10. 1981: Error analysis and interlanguage. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Coughlan, P. and Duff, P. 1994: Same task, different activities: analysis of SLA from an activity theory perspective. In J. Lantolf and G. Appel, editors, 173–94.   
Donato, R. 1994: Collective scaffolding in second language learning. In J. Lantolf and G. Appel, editors, 33–56.   
Ellis, N. 1996: Sequencing in SLA: phonological memory, chunking, and points of order. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 18: 91–126.   
Ellis, R. forthcoming: Task-based language learning and teaching. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Ellis, R. and He, X. 1999: The roles of modified input and output in the incidental acquisition of word meanings. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 21: 285–301.   
Ellis, R., Tanaka, Y. and Yamazaki, A. 1994: Classroom interaction, comprehension and L2 vocabulary acquisition. Language Learning 44: 449–91.   
Foster, P. 1998: A classroom perspective on the negotiation of meaning. Applied Linguistics 19: 1–23.   
Lantolf, J. 1996: Second language acquisition theory-building: ‘Letting all the flowers bloom!’ Language Learning 46: 713–49. – editor, 2000a: Socio-cultural theory and second language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2000b: Introducing sociocultural theory. In Lantolf, J., editor.   
Lantolf, J. and Appel, G., editors, 1994: Vygotskian approaches to second language research. Norwood, NJ: Ablex.   
Leont’ev, A. 1981: Psychology and the language learning process. Oxford: Pergamon.   
Long, M. 1983: Native speaker/non-native speaker conversation in the second language classroom. In Clarke, M. and Handscombe, J. editors, On TESOL ’82: Pacific perspectives on language and teaching. Washington, DC: TESOL. 1989: Task, group, and task-group interactions. University of Hawaii Working Papers in ESL 8: 1–26. 1996: The role of the linguistic environment in second language acquisition. In Ritchie, W. and Bhatia, T., editors, Handbook of second language acquisition. San Diego, CA: Academic Press.   
Long, M. and Crookes, G. 1987: Intervention points in second language classroom processes. In Das, B., editor, Communication and learning in the classroom community. Singapore: SEAMEO.   
Mackey, A. 1999: Input, interaction and second language development: An empirical study of question formation in ESL. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 21: 557–87.   
Pica, T. 1996: Second language learning through interaction: multiple perspectives. Working Papers in Educational Linguistics 12: 1–22. 1997. Second language teaching and research relationships: a North American view. Language Teaching Research 1: 48–72.   
Pica, T., Kanagy, R. and Falodun, J. 1993: Choosing and using communication tasks for second language instruction. In Crookes, G. and Gass, S., editors, Tasks and language learning: integrating theory and practice.   
Platt, E. and Brooks, F. 1994: The ‘acquisition-rich environment’ revisited. The Modern Language Journal 78: 497–511.   
Prabhu, N.S. 1987: Second language pedagogy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Robinson, P. 1995: Task complexity and second language narrative discourse. Language Learning 45: 99–140.   
Robinson, P., Ting, S. and Unwin, J. 1996: Investigating second language task complexity. RELC Journal 26: 62–79.   
Samuda, V. 2000: Guiding relationships between form and meaning during task performance: the role of the teacher. In M. Bygate et al., editors.   
Schmidt, R. 1990: The role of consciousness in second language learning. Applied Linguistics 11: 129–58.   
Skehan, P. 1996: Second language acquisition research and task-based instruction. In Willis, J. and Willis, D., editors, Challenge and change in language teaching. Oxford: Heinemann. – 1998a: Task-based instruction. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 18: 268–86. 1998b: A cognitive approach to language learning. Oxford: Oxford University Press.   
Skehan, P. and Foster, P. 2000: Cognition and tasks. To appear in Robinson, R., editor, Cognition and second language instruction. New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Skehan, P., Foster, P. and Mehnert, U. 1998: Assessing and using tasks. In Renandya, W. and Jacobs, G., editors, Learners and language learning. Singapore: Seameo.   
Swain, M. 1985: Communicative competence: some roles of comprehensible input and comprehensible output in its development. In Gass, S. and Madden, C., editors, 235–52. 1995: Three functions of ouput in second language learning. In Cook, G. and Seidhofer, B., editors, For H.G. Widdowson: Principles and practice in the study of language. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 2000: The output hypothesis and beyond: mediating acquisition through collaborative dialogue. In Lantolf, J., editor.   
Swain, M. and Lapkin, S. 1998: Interaction and second language learning: two adolescent French immersion students working together. The Modern Language Journal 82: 320–37.   
Swain, M. and Lapkin, S. 2000: Focus on form through collaborative dialogue: exploring task effects. In Bygate, M. et al., editors.   
Van Lier, L. 1991: Inside the classroom: learning processes and teaching procedures. Applied Language Learning 2: 29–69. 1996: Interaction in the language curriculum: awareness, autonomy and authenticity. London: Longman.   
Vygotsky, L. 1978: Mind and society: the development of higher psychological processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 1986: Thought and language. Cambridge: MIT Press.   
Widdowson, H. 1978: Teaching language as communication. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 1998a: Skills, abilities, and contexts of reality. Annual Review of Applied Linguistics 18: 323–33. – 1998b: Context, community and authentic language. TESOL Quarterly 32: 705–16.   
Willis, J. 1996: A framework for task-based learning. London: Longman.   
Wood, D., Bruner, J. and Ross, G. 1976: The role of tutoring in problem solving. Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry 17: 89–100.   
Yule, G. 1997: Referential communication tasks. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Yule, G. and Powers, M. 1994: Investigating the communicative outcomes of task-based interaction. System 22: 81–91.   
Yule, G., Powers, M. and McDonald, D. 1992: The variable effects of some task-based learning procedures on communicative effectiveness. Language Learning 42: 249–77.