# Book reviews

Language and discipline perspectives on academic discourse, Kjersti Fløttum (Ed.). Newcastle: Cambridge Scholars Publishing (2007), (pp. 280) , ISBN 1-84718-093-0. US\$ 79.99

Academic and rhetoric studies have been on the menu of many publications in recent years. Despite their frequency, however, Kjersti Fløttum has succeeded in compiling a tempting smorgasbord for applied linguists and discourse scholars alike. This volume has emerged from two sources. The first is a Norwegian linguistic project named the KIAP project (Cultural Identity in Academic Prose) that has attempted to determine whether cultural identities are identifiable in academic discourse. Fløttum’s and her colleagues’ well-known thesis is ‘‘that discipline is more important than language in the identification of cultural identities’’ (p. 15). The second source of inspiration was a seminar entitled ‘‘Academic Voices in Contrast,’’ held in Bergen in 2006. A mostly familiar list of contributors reflects the current expertise in research into interdisciplinary academic discourse. Several of the articles have adopted a didactic overtone; hence, the book provides an excellent overview of the state of the art of academic discourse studies and makes invaluable reading for students and novice researchers, although it also contributes interesting new insights for more ‘mature’ practitioners of discourse analysis and inquiry into discoursal issues across the curriculum.

The book is divided into three sections, the first of which is Introduction and General Issues. From Philip Shaw’s introduction to the KIAP project, the reader finds that the crux of the project is polyphonic linguistic theory, introduced by Nølke (1989), obviously leading back to the originator of these ideas, i.e., Bakhtin (1981) and/or Volosinov (1986), and frequently applied by Fløttum and her colleagues in their studies. In his reflective and expert introduction, Shaw provides an all-embracing account of the potential difficulties involved in this type of research. These include the choice of comparable material for corpora since discourse cultures, genres, addressees and other textual features are construed through varied disciplinary suppositions. His account underlines the often superficial understanding of different disciplinary discourses by linguists without the domain-specific expertise.

The authors of Chapter 2, Kjersti Fløttum, Trine Dahl, Torodd Kinn, Anje Mu¨ller Gjesdal and Eva Thue Vold have traced research article (RA) writers’ and authors’ voices by means of an array of pronouns and intertextual references. They pose an important question about the purpose of an RA, which they conclude to consist of interaction as much as of persuasion. Contrasting the RAs of linguistics and economics, Fløttum and her colleagues distinguished the functional roles of researcher and text guide in economics articles, while the RAs of linguistics also included the role of an arguer.

The second section, Discipline Focus, opens with Marina Bondi looking into historians’ textual voices and the construction of their own authoritative personae, which display a multiplicity of perspectives on the events reported. She defines history as both ‘‘account and interpretation of events, . [and] also dialogic argumentation of the interpretation put forward’’ (p. 69). She then focuses, firstly, on writer roles and types of evaluation, and secondly, on the writer’s dialogue with expert voices. Bondi’s interesting findings locate a ‘double temporal perspective’ with projections to the future through the historian’s perspective. Her study reveals historians’ voices merging and setting themselves in conflict with the discourse community. Hence, their textual voices, in narrative academic argument, contain not only an evaluation of the expert but also that of the expert’s previous evaluation.

Ken Hyland addresses discourse variation in academic discourse within the framework of social constructionism and shows how writers’ choices in discourse reflect and construct their disciplines. Like Shaw’s article at the beginning of the book, Hyland’s also functions as an instructive lesson in the study of discourse. He questions the success of interdisciplinary work resulting from the different ways of thinking and constructing knowledge in the different disciplines. He argues for the distinctive existence of different disciplines proven by the study of their rhetorical practices and asserts that the role of disciplinary variation should be the most important research paradigm in EAP e at the expense of $2 0 ^ { \mathrm { t h } }$ century genre studies.

Franc¸oise Salager-Meyer, Marı´a Angeles Alcaras Ariza and Maryelis Pabo- ´n tackle academic book reviews in French and English, a genre that goes back over 300 years. Although book reviews are nowadays regarded as possessing only marginal status, they in fact constitute an intermediate genre, characterized by social interaction between reviewer and reviewees. The value of book reviews varies considerably across the curriculum. Yet with the growing number of journal and on-line publications, they are increasingly important, especially in the humanities, in the assessment of the quality, integrity and value of a new contribution for a given discipline (p. 111).

The following chapter by Johan L. Tønnesson presents a complex rendering of historical discourse contrasting the discourse of the Second World War period with that of the 1990s, as expressed in two history works dealing with the same local phenomenon. Tønnesson approaches his topic on cooperation and conflict between authorial voices and model readers with three methods. His short conclusion to the study does not, however, do sufficient credit to the sophisticated maze of tables and other illustrations.

The third part of the book, titled Language Focus, begins with Shirley Carter-Thomas’s discussion of conditionals, a neglected area of research, focusing on the equivalence of the conditionals if and si in English and French medical RAs. This article thus connects with one of Fløttum’s themes, i.e., potential polyphonic interaction. The results discerned new features specific to medical RAs, also finding aspects related to rhetorical part-genres but, more interestingly, new combinations of conventional verb forms denoting varying degrees of hypotheticality. CarterThomas also found English RAs more subtle than their direct French equivalents, whose national characteristics of claim-making remain visible.

Elizabeth Rowley-Jolivet continues with an outstandingly clear genre study of ‘if’ in medical discourse as a device of hedging. She points out that where an if-clause assumes the function of a discourse marker introducing a new topic, it is a question of a politeness strategy. The article contrasts four distinct medical genres: RA, conference paper, case report and editorial. Her discussion of the differences between RAs and conference papers offers useful, practical advice for novices in conference participation, such as the more colloquial register of conference papers.

Francis Grossman and Franc¸oise Wirth, in turn, address the markers of evidentiality in scientific discourse with the aim of distinguishing potential differences of this type in linguistic, economic and medical discourse. In academic papers, the markers of expectation are essential since inferences must be clear. Hence, it is in the interest of the writer to make clear references, inferences and other persuasive remarks. Grossman and Wirth discuss the usage of in fact/en fait, throwing light on their meaning as they are used considerably more in linguistics than in economics and medicine, where they turn out to be hardly used at all.

In the same section, Lita Lundquist writes about academic discourse as social control and systems seen through the use of demonstrative noun phrases in French scientific texts. She distinguishes concrete text from abstract discourse and discusses science as a social control and system, availing herself of Foucauldian and Luhmannian notions of science as a social system.

In the following article, Anna Mauranen addresses the hybrid voices heard in academics’ use of English as a lingua franca (ELF) in international contexts, focusing on explicitness strategies used in rephrasing, topic negotiation and discourse reflexivity. Her data derives from the ELFA corpus that she founded in 2003-06. Mauranen makes pertinent observations on the biases likely to occur in native-speaker assumptions and points out how ELF speakers are no less competent in their negotiations than native speakers, although resorting instead to different kinds of lexical items from those used by native speakers. Her point is that ELF works well in academic settings where communication is facilitated by shared knowledge of the disciplines.

The book concludes with John Swales’s and Sarah Van Bonn’s contribution comparing similarities and differences in corresponding French and English RA abstracts in the field of EAP/ESP/Applied Linguistics. The authors point out the recent proliferation of research into RA abstracts. In their conclusions, they also address the difficulties of contrastive discourse studies from the point of view of the discourse community, including the problem of the comparability of national vs. international audiences. Their solution is to conduct studies within national, bilingual publications, which might be applicable, for instance, to the publications of the national organizations of AILA.

In conclusion, the volume provides an impressive collection of academic discourse studies with a highly interdisciplinary and, in particular, an instructional focus. Kjersti Fløttum has gathered together a variety of first-class scholars, many of whom have an explicitly didactic message in their writing. The book makes intriguing reading for any discourse analyst, but even more important is its methodological advice for students and novices working within the multitude of streams in the linguistic field. Nevertheless, the collection would have benefited from a harmonization of the translation of the term sakprosa (non-fiction) into English (pp. 3, 40), as well as more precise editing, a more academic style and better consistency in its punctuation. In the interests of the vast ELF readership, it would have been polite to provide all of the French examples with English glosses.

# References

Bakhtin, M. (1981). The Dialogical Imagination. (C. Emerson & M. Holquist, Trans.). In M. Holquist (Ed.). Austin: University of Texas Press.   
Nølke, H. (1989). Polyfoni. En sprogteoretisk indforing. ARK 48. [Polyphony: A language theoretical introduction. ARK 48]. København: Handelshøjskolen i København. [Copenhagen: The Copenhagen Business School.].   
Volosinov, V. N. (1986). Marxism and the Philosophy of Language. (L. Matejka and I.R. Titunik, Trans.). London: Harvard University Press. [1973/1929].

Hilkka Stotesbury Language Centre, University of Joensuu, Joensuu, Finland E-mail address: hilkka.stotesbury $@$ joensuu.fi

doi:10.1016/j.jeap.2008.05.001

Feedback in second language writing: contexts and issues, Ken Hyland, Fiona Hyland (Eds.). Cambridge, UK: Cambridge University Press (2006), (pp. 261), ISBN 0-521-67258-9. US\$33.00/UK£20.10

Feedback has always been the sine qua non of writing instruction. While feedback in the early years was limited largely to summative feedback (in the form of a letter grade with a brief end comment justifying the grade) or error corrections by the teacher, the advent of the writing process movement in the latter half of the 20th century made both teacher and peer feedback on all aspects of writingdboth process and productda central focus of writing instruction (Matsuda, 2003; Susser, 1994). The reference point of feedback also expanded from lexical and syntactic issues to genre-specific features as well as larger sociocultural contexts of writing. The advancement of technology also created additional options for both teacher and peer feedback. While there were several books that focused centrally on various aspects of these issues (Ferris, 2002, 2003; Goldstein, 2005; Liu & Hansen, 2002), no single book addressed all of these issues togetherduntil the publication of Feedback in Second Language Writing: Contexts and Issues.

This volume begins with an introductory chapter by Hyland and Hyland, which provides a brief historical background and a broad overview of existing research on various issues related to feedback in the L2 writing classroom, including: teacher feedback, writing conferences, peer feedback, computer-mediated feedback. The remainder of the book, which departs from these conventional categories, is organized in three major sections, including sociocultural dimensions, delivery and focus dimensions, and interpersonal and interactional dimensions.

Part I, ‘‘Situating Feedback: Sociocultural Dimensions,’’ sets the scene for the discussion of feedback by focusing on the sociocultural contexts of L2 peer feedback. In Chapter 2, Olga S. Villamil and Marı´a C. M. de Guerrero situate the discussion of peer feedback in the theoretical context of Vygotskian sociocultural theory, and present a synthesis of a series of previously published studies. In contrast, Gayle Nelson and Joan Carson’s chapter considers issues that arise in heterogeneous peer response groups. In addition, they join a growing number of researchers (e.g., Atkinson, 1999; Li, 2005) in responding to previous criticisms against culture-based explanations of student behavior with an expanded conception of culture.

In Chapter 4, Christine Tardy takes on another controversial notion, appropriation. By incorporating theoretical models of appropriation in recent studies of teacher feedback, including her own recent study, Tardy shifts the focus from the traditional, monological conception to the Bakhtinian dialogical perspective, which not only focuses on the appropriation of student texts by the teacher but also recognizes the appropriation of teacher’s texts by students through the negotiation of teacher feedback.

Part II, ‘‘Shaping Feedback: Delivery and Focus Dimensions,’’ consists of 5 chapters that explore different ways of providing teacher feedback and their effects on student writing. In Chapter 5, Dana Ferris presents a study that addresses one of the major controversies in the field of second language writingdthe efficacy of error feedback. She found that error feedback did improve student revisions but had limited impact on subsequent writing assignments; that the error feedback made by the teachers in the study was largely appropriate; that teachers used a range of feedback strategies yet most of the teacher comments led to improvements in student writing; and that, with a few exceptions, most of the error feedback resulted in short-term improvements regardless of error types.

The next two chapters focus on the use of technology in providing feedback. Chapter 6 by Paige D. Ware and Mark Warschauer provides a broad overview of three strands of research on electronic feedback, including: the potential of