Book review

# International perspectives on teaching and learning academic English in turbulent times, James Fenton, Julio Gimenez, Katherine Mansfield, Percy Martin, Mariangela Spinillo (Eds.). Routledge, New York (2023). p. 162 pp 978-1-032-25479-4

The Covid-19 pandemic has posed unprecedented challenges to allactivities in higher education, including EAP teaching and learning. Many universties rapidy trnsitioned from offline to online education in reonse to the healh crisis and physical distancing regulations, implementing adaptations from the perspectives of institutions, lecturers, as wellas learners. Given the abundant studies of online or blended education (e.., Crosthwaite, Sanueza, & Schweinberger, 2021; Rajendram & hi, 2022), it s high time todiscuss the adaptations in universities in the hope that they would be useful should we be confronted by similar challenges in the future. Intenational etives on tching nd ing demic glish i bulen tim i a timely colletion f a brod sptrm f practical adaptations in EAP teaching, learning, and assessment, in a variety of context from around the gloe, which will b of interest to EAP practitioners and stakeholders.

This 21-chapter volume is thematically divided into four parts: institutional responses to the pandemic, adaptations to online teaching, collaboration among stakeholders, and assessment of online lerning. The contributors in Part  (Chapters 1-6) offer a broad array of context-specific responses to Covid-era challenges in order to guarantee high-quality EAP instuction. Discussed from a macroinstitutional perspective, these responses can be divided into two dimensions: support for lecturers (Chapters 2-4) and support for learners (Chapters 1, 5 6). To support lecturers' shifing to the virtual environment, intitutions and departments are suggested to act swifl o provide lecturers with adequate training on key skils, such as through an induction program (Chapter 2) or digital literacy training (Chapter 4). Otherwise, as demonstrated by Kneevic (Chapter 3), inuficint institutionl support can reult in EAP lecturers difficulties with technology or even failure to adapt to remote teaching. The remaining three chapters in Part 1 (Chapters 1, 5, 6) deepen our understanding of how to suport learners using e-tools while also taking into account their well-being and mental health. For example, Mezek and Kaufhold (Chapter 5) describe how their university redesigned the EAP course and implemented online learning platorms to reduce students sense of social isolation. In Chapter 6, Wette reports how her institution implemented flipped learning for graduate students asynchronous learning, which mitigated their passivity and stres caused by synchronous learning. Overall the contributors to Part I summarie the impact of the pandemic on lecturers and leaners and reflect on how ther institutions can provide support. Two main takeaways are discernible: (i) EAP faculties should integrate pedagogy, technology, and researchinformed content when organizing professional development events for lecturers; (i) A holistic" approach, that considers the digital, cognitive, and physical aspects of online learning (p. 7) is essential for institutions when dealing with unexpected challenges during turbulent times.

In addition to institutional responses to Covid-era challenges, another central consideration is how EAP practitioners can adapt teaching approachs and manag online courses. The author in Part I (Chaptr 7-11) delineate two potentil isues that can arise and provided  ie dchr t. st, e  fit tatflting in an online plaform, the prior teaching approach needs to be revised. Second, lecturers need to overcome digital fatigue and technological problems when managing sychronous course onine. ddressig the firs isse, most chapters include updateorvisions to teaching approaches previously employed in an offlineenvironment. For instance, Akhmedjanova and Akhmedova (Chapter 11)discuss the transition from a student-centered approach to a teacher-centered approach, considering that the internet or devices could be unreliable, or that students tend to be les engaged and motivated in online learning. In an effort to maintain a student-centered approach, several chapter contributors modified their courses to become more personalized and supportive of individual learners, such as through flpped classrooms (Chapter 7) and virtual ffice hours (Chapters 8 and 9). Regarding the second isue several contributors turnto flexible and student-led approaches to reduce synchronous contact. For instance, Deroey and Skipp (Chapter 7) and Pereira-Rocha (Chapter 8) use asynchronous videos and individual writing tasks for students to learn independently. In addition, to combat digital fatigue and mitigate the dissociative effcts of asynchronous larning, online chatroms (e.g., WhatsApp group) are commonly used as a supplemental setting for teachers to provide feedback and foster networking among students (Chapters8, 9, 11) Readers who are preparing online or blended courses wil find the adaptations introduced in Part I tobe informative and beneficial.

Part II Chapters 12-16) focuses on collaboration among stakeholders for successful organization and delivery of EAP courses during the pandemic. Starting at the macro-institutional level, Caplan (Chapter 12) demonstrates that online collaboration is crucial for departments and universities to reconcil innovative strategies with the national and global standards for EAP courses and to transcend the synchronous/asynchronous dichotomy in EAP teching. Similarly Steyne et al. (Chapter 13), who collaborate with EAP specialists around Europe, restructure an EAP course into team teaching and illuminate the dual benefit of enhanced engagement and curriculum flexibility. Rodas (Chapter 14) then highlights the value and influential factors of online ollaborative writing groups that span disciplines and instittions to support academics writing for publication. Moving on to the microlevel of collaboration in the EAP classrom, Lennon et al. (Chapter 15) reveal that the use of technology, such as by adopting break-out rooms and online forums, can further boost the effectiveness of peer feedback, a commonly used collaboratie activity for learners. With the similar effrt of using technology in collaborative actvities (such as writig aloud), Ishi (Chapter 16) proposes a model of social presence and engagement between the instructor and learners in the online environment in order to foster interaction and promote a sense of community.

Finall, Part IV (Chapters 17-21) is a thought-provoking section, particularly for readers strugging with online assessment. The authors work to move away from the tradtional ssment of dicrete language kills i.., istening, speaking, reding, and writing) toward formative and sustainable assessment that emphasizes interactive learning and learner autonomy. For example, Dinneen (Chapter 17) introduces a new formative asessment task, namely, an interactive writing task, which evaluates students' sociopragmatic skill and functional language ability. Chapters 18 and 21 cover how combining formative assessment tasks can foster online collaborative learning. Specificall, Tchekpassi and Zhang (Chapter 18) coalesce self-assessment and peer review, while Sit thitikul and Tuvajitt (Chapter 21) combine self-evaluation and collaborative group reports. These attempts are inovative in that the learners' role was reconstructed, not as test-takers, but as "co-creators" f assessment (p. 23). Zhang et al. (Chapter 20) describe the transition in their online programs towards having more formative evaluations and fewer summative ones. Shchemeleva and Smirnova (Chapter 19) further bring to the fore contextual factors, such as institutional policies and collgial collaboration, that influence assesment adjustment in remote teaching. These factors can form an \*asessment culture" that influences local EAP practitioners assesment decisions and practices (p. 243). Although Part IV addresses the needs and approaches to adjusting asessments, some crucial isues are insufficiently discussed, such as how to maintain learners academic integrity in online assessments.

Overall, the volume contributors provide detailed narraties of their first-hand experience with EAP teaching in higher education during the Covid-19 pandemic, ncluding the impact of the cris the areas in education that were most afected, and most importantly, feasible solutions and useful resources (e.g., online laforms, -tols, and websites) to deal with the challenges so as to maintain the overall quality of online teaching. While the volume is a highly recommended reading, several limitations can be noted. First, since most chapters are experiential-riented or qualitative narratives, the efectivenes of the solutions on a large scal is sill unknown. The inclusion of quantitative inquirie into the solutions would have added to the validty of the volume. Adtionally, the organization of the chapters seems problematic sometimes. For instance, Chapter 6 (Part I) describes the implementation of flpped learning in an online environment, which is more relevant to teaching adaptations (Part I) rather than macro-level responses. This might make readers confused if they look for potential solutions at a certain level. Despite these drawbacks, this volume ofers a comprehensive range of nnovative pedagogies and practices in rich contexts and can be useful for currculum developers and EAP practitioners should they encounter similar turbulent times in the future, either with fully online or hybrid courses. As one of the firt attempts to present experiences, challenges, and responses of intitutions and practitioners in the ovid era, the volume breaks new grounds in the area of EAP and will constitute a lasting legacy for EAP teaching and learning..

# References