Book review

Corpus Linguistics for English for Academic Purposes, Vander Viana, Aisling O'Boyle. Routledge (2022) XVI-260 pp (hbk). US\$ 247.38, UK188.62, ISBN: 978-1-138-74131-7

The burgeoning development of English for Academic Purposes (EAP) has witnessed the boom of diversified methodological ap proaches, among which Corpus Linguistics (CL) stands out for it advantage of enabling researchers to handle extensive authentic data As stated by O'Keffe and McCarthy (2022), \*corpora can tell us agreat deal about what constitutes EAP and how we can support specific and purposeful learning and teaching within this domain' (p. 413). The fruitful combination of CL and EAP has eventuated into the emergence of various books like the one co-authored by Vander Viana and Aising OBoyle. Corpus Linguistics for Englis for Academic Purposes is a welcome addition to the existing EAP literature, with a primary focus on exploring how corpora can empower readers to describe and examine diverse lingustic phenomena in spoken, written and computer-mediated academic discourses (CMAD). A particular noteworthy contribution of this book is the inclusion of CMAD, a crucial but largely unnoticed area in EAP research.

This book provides evidence-based examples of what CL can address and elaborates on ways to undertake CL analyses autono. mously. It covers broad topics, such as the principles of corpus analysis, the impact of CL on EAP, the compilation of specialized academic corpora, the corpus tools and software, as well as corpus-based research on spoken, written and CMAD. The inclusion of diverse topics creates a wide-ranging readership, potentially including EAP students, practitioners and researchers.

The book consists of ten chapters, thirten appendices and an index. Each chapter is embedded with case studies in which theory and practice confluence. Throughout this book, the authors maintain steady content comprehensibility through the asy-to-understand presentation of iguisic knowledge, theefective employment of annotate creenshots and example sentences f corpus queries, and the clear activity directions. Further reading references pertaining to the themes are also added at the end of each chapter. Despite the focus on English, the procedures demonstrated, the points made, the suggestions given and the implications held are transferrable to other languages used for academic purposes.

The initial two chapters contextualize the central fcets of EAP research in changing academic landscapes, thereby paving the joint exploration of the following contents. In Chapter 3, the authors establish the essential knowledge required for corpus exploration. After mentioning the categorizations of corpora, the authors privilege the introduction of freey available specialized academic corpora. They end the chapter with adiscussion of eight corpus analytical principles. Introductions on these aspects familiarize the readers with the necessary knowledge to work with corpora and reduce their far of conducting corpora research. Subsequently, aiming to explore the CL-EAP interface, Chapter 4 takes stock of the impact of CL on EAP, exploring both it usefulnessand limitations. Readers seeking practical suggestions will find this chapter very helpful as much inclusion in this chapter is poised to develop their autonomy and empower solutions to original linguistic queries.

Earlier in Chapter 3, some open-acces corpora are provided, but they do not necessarily cater to allour needs, which justifies the building of specialized corpora. Chapter 5is devoted to specialized corpus compilation. The authors approach various considerations that the readers need to take before they embark on corpus compilation in spoken, writen and CMAD. It starts with the criteria that inform our corpus compilation plan. Then, it draws the readers atention to the issue of representativenes and continues with other thought-provoking ssues, including the thical matters, corpus documentation, challenging factors, spoken data transcription, written texts conversion, and the annotation tools involved in corpus compilation. The most remarkable contribution of this chapter is the provision of twenty-five criteria. The value of the criteria is by no means limited to the planning stage and the processof data collection, and they also play a part in the completion stage.

It i indispensable to use software tols when conducting corpus-based research. (Zanettin, 2012). Chapter 6 provides sep-by-step demonstrations on how to use AntConc (Anthony, 2020) to interrogate corpora, taking readers from descriptive statistics to inferentil statistics. Each section is ilustrated by providing information about where (search interfaces), how (operation steps), what (primary window information) and why (combination of quantitative and qualitative). The most important leson learned from this chapter is that corpus analysis must not stop at the level of descriptive statitics, and it i also vital to analyze findings drawing on inferential statistics. Therefore, EAP linguists, especially novices, will find this chapter helpful for developing their practical research skil, equipping them with the necessary ability to use the qualitative investigation to evidence the nature of quantitative results.

The corpus-based evidence on research in Chapters 7, 8 and 9 expounds on how CL can be used to support our investigation of spoken, written and CMAD and how they are diffr yet interweave with each other at the same time. Main topic, including signalling listenership, three-minute thesis presentations, citation practices, hedging, academic blogging, e-mail interaction, and online discussion forums are discussed. Compared with the spoken and written discourses, CMAD has some unique characteristics: highly multimodal, multilingual, intertextual, cllaborative, and mobile with hetrogeneous audiences. The authors conclude by emphasizing the nee for granting a prominent position to CMAD in CL-EAP, which would help cast new light on academic practices. Finall, the authors recapitulate the nine previous chapters and offer constructive suggestions on future research in the last chapter.

The book has several strengths. First is the high replicability of the clear and detailed methodological explanations, allowing readers from various backgrounds to replicate the procedures in their explorations. Readers are pointed toward corpus tools not only allowing for working with freely general and specialized available corpora (Chapter 3), but also for self-built corpora (Chapter 5), not only for online corpora examination but also for offline corpora investigation (Chapter 6). Second is its comprehensivenes because of its broad coverage of topics, disciplines, genres (.g,occluded geres in Chapter 4) and reisters (e.., CMAD in Chapter 9). The third one is itsaccessbility. It provides the types of corpora available, with home page hyperlinks and key compositions, saving readers considerable time compiling corpora.

Several areas could be improved, though. First, in terms of organization, there is an overlap between sections 3.2 and 3.3. Both sections are related to the categorization of corpora, but the general and specialized corpora are iscussed first in 3.2, followed by the other five classifications. For clarity, it would be beter to put these two sections together. Second, sometimes a specific method or perspective is introduced on some topics without reference to others that readers would expect to see. For example, given the methodological emphasis of Chapter 6, it would be better to mention other commonly adopted corpus analysis software (e.g, WordSmith Tools). Third, the workload involved in completing the tasks would be considerable, and the absence of suggested answers for open-ended practices might further disappoint reader. If some answer keys and auxiliary materials could beoffered it may elicit better leaning outcomes. Finally, we find some minor editoril isues, including because you [are] the expert of your own context" (p. 7), Table 3.3[Table 3.2]" and Table 3.4 [Table 3.3]" (p. 35), \*Table 3.4 [Table 3.3]" (p. 37) \*to get stated [started] with your corpus explorations"(p. 55), \*the original BAwE [BAsw] files" (p. 132), Figure 6.27 [Figure 6.28]" (p. 135), \*in posing this question) [question]"(p. 167) (our corrections in square brackets).

The areas for potential improvement notwithstanding, Viana and OBoyle outline the value of CL in unveiling the language features that realize various functions in different academic discourses. Suggestions on building corpora of the occuded genre, academic popularization corpora and EAP teacher corpora inspire further inquiries into academic discourses. In adition, the development of technology and maturity of online education wil give rise to new types of corpora such as multimodal and CMAD corpora, which will bring new challenges for the EAP community in the years to come.

With CL-based EAP research, we can conduct EAP needs analysis independently using a data-driven approach based on our own eeds. Furthermore, CL-based reearch can facilitate the processing of lage datasets and analysi of different academic discourses. In a globalized digital environment, we should contribute to the collection of freely shared specialized corpora and interdisciplinary collaboration, which will maximize the use of corpora and directl benefit the EAP communit, as Viana and OBoyle point out. On the whole, this book is successful in unpacking how CL can empower the EAP research. The authors' efort to suggest future research directions of CL on EAP is even more valuable. We believe it wil benefit EAP students, practitioners and researchers tremendously

# References