# I just feel very dispensable': Exploring the connections between precarity and identity for academic literacy developers\*

Michelle Jouberta,\*, Sherran Clarenceb,c

a Centre for Teaching and Learning, University of the Free State, Bloemfontein, South Africa b Doctoral School and Research Operations, Nottingham Trent University, Nottingham, UK c CHERTL, Rhodes University, Grahamstown, South Africa

# ARTICLEINFO

# ABSTRACT

Handling Editor: Dr Hilary Nesi

Keywords:   
Academic literacy development   
Agency   
Identity   
Margaret Archer   
Massification   
Precarious employment   
Social realism

Precarious employment is a well-established feature in academia, with many lecturers, tutors and professional services staff on forms of fixed-term contract. It is especially a feature of academic development spaces, such as English for Academic Purposes (EAP) programmes, and academic staff and student development programmes. Precarity results in high staff turnover and undermines staff credibility and capacity; these issues may impact student success. Further, for lecturers and tutors themselves, there are implications for their professional identity and sense of legitimacy within their role, department, and university. Using data from qualitative surveys and interviews with academic literacy practitioners in South Africa, this article explores how being precariously employed affects agency and the development of a professional practitioner identity for those on fixed-term contracts. Using aspects of Archer's social realist framework to theorise agency, we show how precarity impacts a sense of purpose and professional self within the university in relation to other academics and students.

# 1. Introduction

Precarity in academia is a concept that has been widely researched in recent years (see Burton & Bowman, 2022; Courtois & O'Keefe, 2015; Ivancheva, 2015; Mason & Megoran, 2021). The rise of neoliberal managerialist cultures and practices in universties has meant that universities folowing the culture of New Public Management (NPM) behave more like corporations and lesslike publicly funded institutions. As a result several universities have increased the number of precarious or non-permanent employment contracts they offr. In esence, NPM enacts the neoliberal principle of competition and afre market, along with a smalle state and reduced public expenditure (Lorenz, 2012). This means that universties are in direct competition with one another - for students and staff, for grant money, and so on. To be competitive, you ned to be relatively welloff ith the funds for new building, ctting-edge technology, smart accommodation, and more. For many universties facing reduced support from the government, this means trim ming the wage bill and fied-term contracts are les expensive than permanent ones; this is certainly a notable reason for the rise in precarious employment in recent decades.

Increased massification within higher education -a central feature of neoliberalism- has led to increased student numbers and thus also a greater need for lecturers and tutors. Many of these lecturers and tutors are employed on sessional or non-permanent contracts to reduce labour costs (Ivancheva, 2015; Wald & Harland, 2020), particularl i countries where governments have cut higher education funding (De Villers & Steyn, 2009). Such cuts have led to universities being more reliant on student fees (Wald & Harland, 2020). Student numbers thus continue to increase as universtie actively seek to recruit fee-paying students to increase their income. Yet, with the increase in numbers comes greater diversity of student nes and levels of preparednes for higher education study. This has salience for academic literacies development and those who teach in this field, which includes English for Academic Purposes (EAP), extended curriculum and foundation provision, and bridging courses for students entering the universty for the first time.

The effects of precarity on lecturers and tutors have been documented by researchers exploring both the economic and psycho social aspects of this phenomenon (Albayrak-Aydemir & Gleibs, 2023; Lopes & Dewan, 2015; Mason & Megoran, 2021). In this paper, we are particularly concerned with the psycho-social impacts of precarity, which relate to how being on a non-permanent contract can impact people psychologically (ie, how they develop a professional identity) and socially (i.e, how they develop a sense of belonging or matterig to the universty. Researchers point to how precarious short-term contracts de-prioritise these staff members, leaving them feeing vulnerable and powerlessto push back against overwork and exploitation (Lopes & Dewan, 2015). They are also often unable to enact the same kinds of academic agency their permanently employed and recognised counterparts may have, for example i choosing what t teach, what projects to accept and turn down, and in projecting thir career development goals into the future (Mason & Megoran, 2021). Early carer academics, women, and people of colour are over-represented on precarious or short-term contracts (Arday, 2022; Begum & Saini, 2018; Elshafei, 2022), which further complicates the picture, as academia is sil battling to transform deely to be more anti-racist, anti-sexist and more inclusie, equitable, and fair (CHE, 202; Kangataran, 2023). The wider environment that academics are part of, and how open, accepting and nurturing tht environment is, thus impacts how settld they fee, and how visibl and inested in the el as well This is an important point to consider whendicsing the effects of precarious employment on academics sense of self-worth and their sense of being valued and valuable (Elshafei, 2022; Mason & Megoran, 2021).

We are especiall interested in the efect of precarity on academics employed to teach and develop modules related to student academic literacies and learning for example, EAP; extended curriculum or foundation/access modules; and writing tutoring or kils courses). Academic literacy practitioners in various international contexts for example, the UK, Canada and Australia) have been affected by precarity, as the work they do is often done at scale and is regularly positioned on the 'margins' of academia (ee for examples, Breshears, 2019; Kadmos & Taylor, 2024). These margins are those physical and metaphorical spaces outside of or adjunct to the 'mainstream' curriculum students must study to attain their degree or diploma (e.g, Breshears, 2019; Ding & Bruce, 2017; Hadey, 2015; MacDonald, 2016). This marginality may, for example, present as working in a set of temporary or out-of-the-way offices that are hard to find (physical marginalisation), being given tutorial or teaching time outside of students' core curiculum, or teaching literacies in disembedded or disconnected skills-based' modules (metaphorical marginalisation) (see Elshafei, 2022; Hathaway, 2015).

Many academic literacy practtioners acros higher education contexts work in and across these extra spaces - writing or language centres, student support centres, sesional EAP programmes - and many of them work on some form of short-term contract without any guarantees of extesion or renewal (Elshafei, 202; Corcoran & Williams, 2021; Hyland, 2018). Yet, as massification has increased and student diversty along with it, academic literacy development (ALD) writ large has become increasingly les 'adjunct' to core university busines. Bruce (2022, p. 10), for example, argues that EAP has become a globalized subfield of language education'; LD more broady is widespread within and across the currculum in many higher education contexts (Wingate, 2018; Clarence & McKenna) 2017; Thies et al., 2014).

In the South African higher education context, the positioning of academic literacy work has had a mixed history, the conceptual baggage of which stil sems to impact how it is perceived in instutions. It is generall aged that the history of ALD work in outh African higher ucation ook place in three phases although this phasd history is not true for all outh African institions). The first phase in the development of the field, in the 1980s, was largely socio-political apartheid liberalisation, mostly focused on supporting black students who were allowed to start attending historically white universtie. These students were seen to have a language problem', and the work of academic iteracy practitioners was focused primarily on helping students acquire English as a second language rather than on acquirig the literacy practices necessary for reading, writing and thinking in a higher education environment (Boughey, 2013; Boughey & Niven, 2012; Cleg, 2009; Scott, 2009). The second phase (the late-1990s and the mid-200s) began as universitie formally diversifid following the end of Apartheid and the publication of the 1997 White Paper (DoE, 1997). This phase was characterised by formal research on language and literacy, leading to a firm focus on helping students acquire generalised and specialised knowledge of valued literacy practices across the curriculum (Boughey & Niven, 2012). The third (and more-or-less current) phase continues this critical work, yet has also been characterised by a persistent remedial view of ALD. This remedial view of the work is largely in response to the diversity of the student body, the prevalece of universt rankings as measures of succes (and resultant pressure on retention and throughput), and the need for universities to shore up their reputations to recruit new fee-paying students (Boughey & McKenna, 2021; Clarence, 2019).

At several institutions, the legacy of this phased history is sill realised through the interplay between the structural positioning of ALD work (whether it is positioned in an academic department or as a support service, whether practitioners are on permanent or precarious contracts) and institutional perceptions of what the work is and what it should aim to achieve (Joubert, 2023). This interplay betwee structural positioning and institutional perceptions can present in various ways. For example, at several institutions, long-term professional development training/workshops/opportunities are generally reserved for permanent staff. In contrast, training for precarious staff is generally limited to one-off or shorter-term interventions' to upskill or help them reach the standard the university expects. This interplay can also be seen in the way that, despite many years of research by those in the field arguing for the value of systemic literacy and EAP development for allstudents, this work is sill perceived by many in universities as remedial or optional support. This perception often means that there is lile urgency around finding permanent funding for contracts and non-marginal ffice and teaching spaces for stff on these contracts. This perception also makes it hard for those who are persistently seen as doing optional' rather than 'core' work in the university to challenge this positioning, and to change the minds of university leaders and discipline-based colleagues about the value of what they do.

The history and durability of the perceptions surrounding the work have meant that, despite the value of the work they do, many ALD and EAP professionals remain precariously employed. This has significant implications for how visible they are, how valued they feel, and the extent to which they feel able to invest in their ongoing professional development and work (see Elshafei, 2022). I turn, we argue that precarity has important implications for the work such practitioners do for and wit students, al of whom need some form of academic litracy learning as they enter and move through thir degre or diploma programme (Thies et al., 2014; Wingate, 2018). Ultimately, our am in exploring the isue of precarity in the field of acadmic litrcy s tiedto the integral nature of this work to higher education. It is important to investigate the subjective experiences of practitioners who are made precarious' so that we can interrogate the ways in which we invest in, support, and develop these practitioners. Supporting precariously employed staf also means supporting the students they work with and students access to knowledge, learning, and successat and afer university.

# 1.1. Theoretical framework

This paper explores how precariously employed academic literacy practitioners exercise agency in constructing and negotiating their roles and sense of professional self and identity. We have drawn on Margaret Archer's (1996) social realist framework to un. dertake an analysis of agency in our data, through looking at the underlying structures and cultures around ALD work that shape or influence agency enactment and identity-making. Archer (196) explains that structure' is a useful term to refer to pattens in social behaviour, physical material interests and resources. She provides examples of structures that include race, gender, educational systems, organisational stuctures, and social cass (Archer, 1996). Structures are also a set of internally related objects' and, as such can together form larger structures (Danermark t l., 2002, p. 178); for example, gender and race are often related withn structures such as a reearch supervision environment, where ased on your gender and race, youmay receive different treatment than thers and have accesstodifferent resources and means for success (ee Dinsmore & Roksa, 2023). In this paper, the structures we are interested in are the precarious contract iself, and the structures that shape how funding decisions are made, how academic units, centres or departments operate, and how professonal development oportunities are made available t academics. Structures al operate in line with, or against, prevailing culture, which is usually les visible than structures can be, and more enduring or resistant to change (Boughey & McKenna, 2017).

Culture is constituted by ideas, ideologies, beliefs, theories, and values, which become accepted norms of behaviour (Archer, 1996) Cultural systems can evolve over time due to the expansion of knowledge, research, and changing beliefs (Archer, 1996). However, change within the cultural domain often proves dfficult and takes place gradually compared to the speed with which structures can change. In this study, cultures argely play out as the ways in which ALD work is perceived by those within an institution, stemming from the phased history discussed earlier. These perceptions run on a continuum from ALD work as an optional extraform of language support for some students to a set of critical practces al students ned to learn. Culture in this study also links to the ways in which power plays out in an institution, and who is give preference or pririty over others. For example, even if a hed of department creaes a new programme for saff development, saff on a temporary contract may not be able to register if there is a pre-existing culture of prioritising the development of staff in permanent roles..

Alternatively, an academic leader can cultivate an enabling culture around, say, professional development even where the formal structures (a policy) may not necessarily make this possible by setting up informal opportunities to grow and learn, such as journal clubs, networks and so on. We have applied this concept in relation to structure and agency, to understand how and why the participants in our study who seem to have enabling structures stil struggle to feel valued, recognised and able to invest in the devel. opment of a professional practitioner identity. We postulate that this is because the cultural positioning and understandings of academic literacy development and related work, discussed in the opening sections of the paper, persist despite sructural change. And this persistence makes the full exercise of practitioner agency challenging at times.

In discussing her conceptualisation of agency, Archer acknowledges that individuals posses the properties and capacities to elf. monitor their lives, mediate the structural and cultural aspects of society, and thereby contrbute to societal perpetuation and transformation (2002, p.19). This means that, both individually and collectively, people have the capacity to act, to make changes, even though there may be imitations imposed on them by the structures and cultures they are part of that can be hard to mitigate or overcome. People have the capacity to contribute to change as well as to keep things as they are with the choices they make and the ways in which they respond to existing cultural and structural conditions. People also have the capacity to set goals and work towards achieving them. However, we do need to acknowledge, again, the relationality of Archer's framework here: structure, culture and agency do not act independently of one another, they are always acting in relation to one another, at times enabling and at others constraining choice, change and action.

Our focus in this paper is on exploring the experiences of the sampled precariously employed academic literacy practitioners and the effects of precarity on their sense of belonging, or 'mattering (Schlossberg, 1989, and agency. We thus primarily focus on an in-depth exploration of the cultures that surround the precariously employed academic literacy practitioners in this study and their sense of what enables or constrains their agency in constructing and enacting a professional practitioner identity and sense of elf.

# 2. Methodology

The data analysed for this study have been drawn from a larger PhD study which sought to examine the ways in which academic literacies practitioners construct and reconstruct their professonal identity considering structural and cultural forces that affect them (Joubert, 2023). Convenience sampling was used to identify South African higher education institutions willing to participate. Every effort was made to ensure that the sample included an even spread of dfferent kinds of instition - traditional, comprehensive and universities of technology. The final sample included two universities f tchnology, one comprehensive univerity and six traditional universities. I is important to note that the datai skewed towards precariously employed academic litracy practitioners working at traditional institutions. This is an important point since higher education institutions in South Africa are stratified with different recruitment and employment policies and are constituted by diffrent student cohorts with varying levels of support needs (Chetty, 2014).

Data for the larger study were generated in three phases: questionnaires, interviews, and document analysis. As we are looking at participants accounts of agency and identity-making, we are looking only at the open-ended responses in the questionnaires and the interview data in this paper. An online questionnaire was circulated to participating institutions and any academic literacy practitioners were invited to respond, regardlessof contract type or term. The sampling method used was a mix of maximum variation and snowball sampling. Although the primary researcher (Joubert) selected a wide range of participants who related to the am of the study to achieve as heterogenous a sample as possible (Onwuegbuzie & Leech, 2007; Etikan et al., 2016), participants who responded were asked to share the questionnaire link and participant information form with other colleagues who may have been interested in participating. The questionnaire primarily explored what structures and cultures exist within the field of academic literacies devel. opment and how these might impact practitioner agency and professional identity construction in constraining and/or enabling ways. There were 96 responses in total across the nine participating universities.

In the second phase of data generation, semi-structured interviews were held with those participants who had volunteered themselves as potential interview candidates in the questionnaire. In total, 15 first interviews were conducted, and follow-up in. terviews were conducted with ten of the 15 participants, most of these employed within traditional universities similar to Rusel Group universties in the UK). The kinds fteaching they were doing at the time and the different structures and cultures they were part of would have informed their responses,although across the dataset, we did not note major differences i experiences related to university type. The aim of the interviews was to explore in more depth how academic literacy practitioners construct and reconstruct their professional identitis considering certain structural and cultural frces that surround them and how these impact the work they do.

Although the larger project did not originally aim to investigate precarity in depth, there were several precariously employed academic literacy practitioners represented in the questionnaire data and in the interview data, and thus precarity was highlighted as an issue for further exploration. Thus, for this paper all data were inductively coded and analysed using Atls.ti i response to the research problem posed in the opening section of the paper. The themes constructed from the data were then mapped against some of Archer's core concepts (i.e, structure, culture, agency). The dicussion in this paper centres around four precariously employed academic literacy practitioners from the interviews, Grace, Evelyn, Willow and Mila (all pseudonyms), along with insights from the anonymised questionnaire respondents. These two data sources have enabled us to explore the individual and ollctive experiences of precarious employment in the field of academic iteracies development in South Africa, noting the limitations mentioned above as regards the type of university and related funding and employment implications.

Before continuing, it is important to mention two acronyms we use moving forward for ease of reference and writing. From this point onwards, we refer to permanently employed Academic Literacy Practitioners as ALPs'. For practitioners in precarious forms of employment, we wil use the acronym PALPs (Precarious Academic Literacy Practitioners). We have both, at various points in our careers, been both ALPs and PALPs, and our experiences have shaped, to some extent, our reading of the literature as well as our reading of the data (see Courtois & O'Kefe, 2015). To mitigate an over-identification with participants, we drew on critical social theory as a lens to interpret the data and engaged in numerous conversations during the larger study that enabled us to reflect on our own experiences and separate these as far as possible from those of the participants, to allow their experiences to take the fore.

# 3. Findings and discussion.

In embarking on this research, it was first necessary to establishthe extent to which precarious forms of employment are present for ALD practitioners at the sampled South African higher education instutions. Although the extent of precarious employment structures in ALD varied at the participating institutions, the data nevertheless showed that these precarious forms of employment follow a similar trend to the increase in precarious employment practice in higher education globally. In this study, 41 respondents $( 4 3 \% )$ $\mathbf { n } =$ 96) reported that they were on some form of precarious contract, be it ad hoc (i., zero hours) or fixed term. gain, it is important to note that mostof the questionnaire data was generated by staf in traditional institutions, and so this representation of precarious employment may diffr from other kinds of institution in South Africa. From this data, however, we can deduce that academic literacy development work and language teaching at the nine sampled institutions have ben impacted by the effects of massfication and New

Public Management, specificall in relation to the number of students who need academic litracy support and the cost-cutting measures that are part and parcel of the neoliberal university (Arday, 2022).

This context enables a beter understanding of some of the driving forces behind precarity in this field. The larger study from which this paper draws shows how, at many South African higher education institutions, the work of ALPs (and ALPs themselves by implication) is done, literally or metaphorically on the periphery of their institutions, as discussed earlier in this paper.

The discussion of the findings wil be divided into hre sections. The firs section explores the ways in which the PALPs experienced their precarity by focusing on the institutional cultures that surrounded them and their sense of agency. Specificall, we focus on how they perceived their precarity and how they believed their intitutions perceived them, in turn. The second section focuses on how precarity has impacted the PALPs. We pay specificattention to the ways in which their sense of professional identity and slf has been impacted, how their precarity has afected the work they do (and feel able to do), and how their experiences of professonal devel. opment and support have been affcted by their status as precariously employed. In the final section, we consider osble responses to these experiences from an institutional perspective..

# 3.1. The experience of precarity

The most dominant thread that emerged from the PALP data was that of uncertainty and insecurity. This was an expected finding since insecurity is a key dimension of precarious employment (Elshafei, 2022; Courtois & OKeefe, 2015). I our study, this insecurity and uncertainty were largely linked to anxiety and demotivation, which participants felt in response to the continuous uncertainty regarding their future work situations. One questionnaire participant, for example, mentioned that their greatest challenges with working in th fed of ALD were [the uncertainty of contract positions' and jo security'. Another questionnaire participant stated that [working as a yearly contract worker creates a space of great anxiety (wll I get a position again next year?) and uncertainty'. This anxiety is another typical feature of precarity; the uncertainty about one's career pathway and the inability to project into the future and plan a career and a life around that (for example, securing a mortgage) (Lopes & Dewan, 2015).

Living in a state of anxiety is, in turn, linked to the sense of (un)belonging (Burton, 2021; Burton & Bowman, 2022) - often experienced as powerlessness - that some participants reported experiencing as a direct result of being precariously employed. This (un)belonging- f not mattering to the university (Schlossberg, 1989)- is not only to their department or unit but also to the broader higher education space, which is kping with research into the experiences of precarity in higher education: insecurt, anxity, (un) belonging are inked to a broader sense of powerlessnessand social subordination (Lopes & Dewan, 2015; Mason & Megoran, 2021). When asked how she saw herself fitting into higher education, Mila commented:

I don't. [laughs]. It's tough ..Ijust feel very dispensable. But I think that that's probably par for the course in academia, generall, in terms of the models that academia seems to follow all over the world, and that it takes an awful lot to prove yourself. And even then, that might not be good enough to be taken seriously enough to be granted a permanent position.

Mila particularly noted that her dispensability semed tobe par for the course in academia' and that even if she continued to prove her worth, it might never be good enough to be given permanent employment. Her sense of individual marginalisation was compounded by working in a field that is deprioritised relative to core academic work by being positioned as a professonal or academic 'service in several South African higher education institutions (Joubert, 2023). Mila expanded upon the above point to include the ways in which her sense of not mattring was compounded by the perceptions of others at her institution of her as a precariously employed staff member. These perceptions were tied specifically to respect.

.. as contract lecturers, [the rest of the institution] dont really equate us with academics as such, or practitioners. We're just sort of flling ole and fullling arvice that ned to be one.  think thee's deinitly mre reet for pmannt saff. think possbly . it's because of the percetion that we're not doing it fll-time. But I mean, obviously, a lot of us arent doing it full-time, not because we don't want to but because no one's going to hire us permanently. So, I don't think it's seen as us dedicating our lives or our careers to it. And possibly, that's why we get undermined ...

In this extract, Mila specificall talked about the perception her intitution has of her as a service provider rather than an integral. valued member of staf she escribed herelf as just sort of flling a role and fulilling aservice This is important beause mployees experience work as truly meaningful when their conception of their professonal identity matches that of their work context (Albayrak-Aydemir & Gleibs, 2023). So, even though Mila may have seen herself a an academic practitioner, she was acutely aware that there were people at her institution who did not. This ultimately led to her feling disrespected and disregarded by her peers.

Grace made a similar point about her institution's perceptions of precarious stff. Specificall, he talked about contract positions seing understood as filler positions':

. in general, my understanding is that the [part-time lecturing position] is considered like [sic] a developmental position, or like a .. afiller poition where sometimes if they can't find a lecturer at the right lel, theyll then get [a part-time lecturer] because that course needsto betaught, but they just can't find the person to teach it so they'l take [a part-time lecturer] . One of the stipulations is that .. there's no guarante of employment or anything like that ...o yeah ... a] precarious professional context.

The excerpts above evidence Mila's and Grace's sense of the perceptions of them as service providers who were not seriously pursuing arecognised academic crr as such, they were at a remove from the centre, whichi inhabited by those who are seen to be 'dedicating [their] lives' to the field by virtue of their permanent employment.

Evelyn echoed this mismatch between how PALPs are positioned in relation to existing structures and hierarchies of mattering and their own desires and intentions when she poke about the ways in which she felt unable to fully commit to her academic literacy role, despite it being a leadership role, because she was temporary and largely functioned on the periphery of her institution. This underscores the ways in which precarity is not just about having a temporary contract, but also about lacking power by positional differences' (Albayrak-Aydemir & Gleibs, 2023; Lopes & Dewan, 2015). This powerlessness interweaves with the anxiety mentioned earlier.

I think it's difficult to really see your role as being part and parcel of the instution, of afaculty, because .. my position was temporary. And I think that's .. the main reason why I lef .. my status as being a contract employe .. was a problem for me, because I felt that I couldnt really contribute, you know, I've always been unsure about, \*could I say this, could I do this?" You know, "are they expecting me to do this?" There's always that uncertainty.

The cited extracts shed light on key challenges experienced by PALPs, especially the ways in which precarious employment can work to constrain the sense f agency that PALPs fee (could I say/do his?). Precarity, in this sense, however, seems to go beyond the structural - contract type - and afects the ways in which PALPs can be in the higher education space. This is in keeping with Burton and Bowman (2022, p. 500) who refer to precarity as a social and cultural \*condition of being" that can shape one's selfhood, one's relations with others, and the paradigms that one values'.

# 3.2. The effects of precarity

The sense of (un)belonging of the sampled PALPs also impacted their career progreson and professional development in two ways: 1) through a lack f institutional investment in PALPs professional development; and 2) through a lack of PALPs' investment in their own professonal development. Proessinal development here does not refer to standard training that typicall takes place during an academic year related to, for example, curriculum design, teaching, assessment, and administrative processes. Rather, professonal development rfersto the additional or continued enhancement which typicall takes place throughout a person'scaree, for example, training on writing grant proposals and leading research projects, funding and support for conference attendance, networking opportunities, and so on.

Regarding point 1 above if instutions are reticent to invest in the professonal development of precariously employed staff they limit not only the agency of those saff but also the potential impact those stff members can have in the intution and in the higher education space more broady. A questionnaire participant, for example, made this comment: I reall wish there was more opportunty for development for staff It sometimes fees as if opurtunities [sic] for professional growth could be communicated more readily, especially to lower ranking" employees. The participant's rference to lower ranking employees echoes Thorkelson's (2016) dis cussion of the distance between elite academics (i.e., permanently employed academics or tenured researchers) and the so-called precarious underclass' who lack cultural capital (seealso Burton & Bowman, 2022; Mason & Megoran, 2021). Willow, a PALP Who had recentl become a permanent staff member at her institution, also mentioned the lack of investment in PALPs professional development that often takes place in the field of ALD.

.. the problem also with contracts is there's not a lot of progression for those people on those contracts. And that is quite sad because these people are quite passionate about what they do. And because of the nature of this, the financial nature of this, you can't grow and cultivate people who are on one-year contracts, or not as wellas you would have would like to because they might leave in a year's time or two years' time.

In her comment above, Willow pointed out an important tension that pervades the structures of the neoliberal intitution: financial expenditure and risk. There is acertain amount of risk that institutions weigh up when considering the amount of time and money they invest in the professional development of PALPs or other precariously employed staff since these stff may choose to seek permanent work elsewhere. However, intitutions are more likely to retain staf, even those on precarious contracts, if they invest in them. In a study focused on the professional development of precarious academics, Daddow et al. (2023) found that when institutions invest in the professional development of precariously employed teachers, it not only leads to increased teacher capacity but also to a sense of purpose, increased scholarship, career progression, and greater organisational commitment more generally In our study, Willow mentioned that her institution had to limit inestment in PALPs' professonal development having weighed up the time and cost of such cultivation against the likelihood of retaining the PALPs year-on-year.

A lack of institutional investment in professional development opportunities may constrain a PALP's sense of agency and professional identity. This constraining efect is often compounded by PALPs limiting their own professional development for pragmatic and financial reasons (e., paying for their own professioal memberships or conference attendance), which is another way in which a sense of (un)belonging can negatively impact the career progression of PALPs (point 2 mentioned above). One questionnaire participant, for example, spoke to this point: The uncertainty . leads to you stunting your own development in the field (should I invest in doing an extra degree/certificate if I am unsure of my place in the field?)'. Other comments from PALP participants highlighted the difficulty with investing personal time, finances, and energy in professional ALD development opportunities when, pragmatically, they need to spend time looking for more permanent employment opportunties or work for multiple ntitutions or departments at the same time to make ends meet. One respondent said that [ijf you are [a] contract worker you have no job security and that impacts on your output as some of your time i spent looking for a job elsewhere, while another commented that [a]s largely contract-based staff we cannot always provide the intensity of support that students need, due to the necessity of taking on outside work to supplement income'..

A complex cycle thus emerges: imiting the financial and time investment in PALPs can constrain their professional development and, as such, the impact they can have on students' development of academic literacies. PALPs often look for permanent employment elsewhere and thus may limit their own development i the field of ALD, which can result in a smaller pool of highly qualified and experienced candidates when permanent employment opportunities arise. Part of this, surely, is a limited sense of professional practitioner identity, as they may fel like they are doing a eries of jobs rather than building a carer which coheres around futurefacing plans and action.

# 3.3. Breaking the cycle

This complex cycle llustrates the intricate interplay of institutional and sector-wide structures and cultures, which in turn act to either constrain or enable PALPs' agency within their institutions. Breaking this complex cycle is thus important to enabling PALPS' greater sense of agency and their investment in the field of ALD, which will enable the nurtring of astronger, coherent professional identity. Inttingy, een many of the panenty mpoyd s sil semed to experice  sense f prcarity, in it iteral ese. by virtue of functioning within the margins. Although ALPs are not the focus of this paper, it istill important to note that the experience of precarity in the broader field of academic literacy seems to extend beyond the structural (i.e., contract-type) to the cultural (linked to the ways in which the work is oten perceived by some institutions as being augmented support Joubert, 20241). In other words, ALPs more broadly may have a longer-term relationship with precarity, which impacts the ways in which they construct and reconstruct their professional identities (see Albayrak-Aydemir & Gleibs, 2023; Joubert, 2023).

Breaking this cycle, however, will require intentional action from multiple stakeholders in higher education intitutions. From an institutional standpoint, part of breaking this cycle is for management teams (both top- and middle-management) to be more inten. tional about the investment made in PALPs. Staf training that is acesible to all stff i one such example. Investig in the professional development of precariously employed staf is another. Mila made this cear when she spoke about how enabled she felt when one of her line managers invested in her professional development by working collaboratively with her on research projects.

.. we've got Dr. X, he's the one who likes us to work collectively on things. And he's very good about providing us as lecturers and academics with like, sort of gency. He's co-written articles with a few of us, I've co-written two with him. And a few of my Other colleagues have as well, which I think is very nice.. gives us a foot in the door and makes us fee like actual academics.

This gave her multiple chances to enact her agency, develop research skill, and produce published research, which is a highly valued form of knowledge production in higher education,giving her greater legitimacy at her institution and personally feling like an actual academic). This kind of management-level support for PALPs i key not only to their own professional development but also to the further deelopment of ALD as a field, hich i vitl for widnig stdt ass nd sucs. Hving sad this, howver t is also important to note that PALPs are often not paid for ths kind of developmental work r for undertaking research. Mila highlighted this:

I think that's finding my own time, because I'm only contracted for .. on paper, for si hours a week .. think it's four hours a week this semester. So, .that's for the lectures and for marking. So, it's basicall if I have any time, over and above that, Il spend it researching.

Mila's reference to if [she has] any time' highlights another part of the challenge of precarity: having research experience and being published is usually a requirement for staf hoping to secure a permanent academic post. Using and creating research is of course, beneficial tothe field itelf and to the provision of ALD support. However, this kind of work most often takes place in a PALP's private capacity and in their rivate time, since most are only paid for measurable hours (i., their hours spent teaching and marking).

To incentivise and encourage research done by contract saff, managers could consider including a set number of research hours into the contracts of precariously employed staff Those staff could then be fully included in researcher development traning and development often reserved for those on teaching and research pathways or in permanent roles. Further, those precariously employed staff should be able to collect any research rewards that come from publishing research (often sponsored by national research bodies such as the National Research Foundation in South Africa or the Research Excellence Framework in the UK). Although it is true that not all istutions expect PALPs to undertake research due to their teaching-focused contracts, having published reseach remains a central criterion considered by universities when making permanent academic appointments. For most of the participants in this study, being seen as an actual academic' by their peers and the university meant using and creating research in the roles, and this was important not only for external legitimacy but for their own identity-making as well.

Key to breaking the cycle, however, is for ALPs and PALPs themselves to continuously engage with their institutions - other academics, other precariouslyappointed staff management, and students - to shape more ccurate understandings of what ALD work is, what it aims to achieve, and how it plays an integral role in student success. Correcting incorrect perceptions of the work will contribute to a beter understanding of value, thus consolidating its legitimacy, and, in turn, the value and legitimacy of the practitioners who do the work.

# 4. Conclusion

Precarious employment is common in fields such as academic literacy development (encompassng EAP, writing centres, generic provision of study skills, and varying forms of embedded literacies development). The situation in South Africa has been unevenly documented and few studies have loked across the sector at multiple universities to understand PALPs' experiences of precarious employment and their agential capacity in relation to their roles. This paper, and the wider study it draws on, contributes to our understanding of the effects and impact of precarious employment within academic literacy development spaces, which is important since the working conditions of stff impact the learning conditions of students (Courtois & 0Keefe, 2015). Our aim with this research was to consider the impact of precarity on those staff whom intutions rely heavily on to ensure that students rceive equitable and qualit literacies learning. Drawing on the questions raised by Courtois and OKeefe (2015, 61), we wanted to think about the impact of precarity on staff and students in a system where students neding the most support are often taught by precariously employed staff whose working conditions make it difficult to adequately support students (see also Elshafei, 2022).

The precarious sttus ofPAPs inthis reearch did have aconstraining effect on ther professional identit, although there were also notable enabling conditions. The first constraint was a constant sense of insecurity, which played out through a lack of motivation and of a sense of (un)belonging, as a professional, to the field and broader institution. When we fee that we do not belong, we feless visible, and in feeling les visible we are less ikely to continue to fight for space' when the space does not seem to be there for us. Ongoing precarity in contract type and forms of professional support offered to ALPs may act to reinforce the cultural perception of ALD as a marginalised entity that can be taught by filler' lecturers rather than specialist practitioners. There were, however, some enablers that seemed to give the PALPs in this study a greater sense of legitimacy and professional identity, such as support from line managers and being involved in formal research - a form of knowledge production valued in higher education contexts.

It seems that precarity pervades the spaces that PALPs inhabit, working to shape the role of PALPs in ALD work and the ways in which they develop firm, authentic and critical practtioner identitie. This has important implications for bringing new, critical voices into the field (for example, in South Africa and the UK where decolonising the currculum and knowledge are important current debates), and for growing and expanding th feld to include practitioners who are representative of the students they work with in terms of race, gender, nationality, home and school background, sexual orientation, aleodednes, culture and ethnicity. In essence, if precarious contracts are here to stay, our argument is that universties that are serious about the environment they create for both staff and student flourishing need to make more intentional investments in the professional development and support of academic literacy practitioners and specialists. Doing so willexpand their sense of agency, create space for new perspectives, and contribute to enhancing their role in enabling wider student success.

# CRediT authorship contribution statement

Michell Joubert: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Methodology, Investigation, Formal analysis Datacuration, Conceptualization. Sherran Clarence: Writing - review & editing, Writing - original draft, Supervision, Formal analysis, Conceptualization.

# References

Abaya  3ti Journal of Social Psychology, 62(suppl. 1), 95-110.   
Archer, M. (1996). Culure and agency: The place of culure in social theory (Revised ed.). Cambridge University Press.   
Arda, .2      153.g 10.1080/01425692.2022.2074375   
Begum, N., & Saini, R. (2018). Deco0osing th curricul. Poli Stdies Rviw, 17(2), 196-201. htps:/di.org/10.1177/1478929918808459   
Boughey, . 03).t   ning o riicf ac g  iey  frc hgeio. Language Teaching, 47(2), 24-42.   
Boughey, C., & McKenna, S. (2017). Analysing an audit cycle: A critical realist account. Studies in Higher Education, 42(6), 963-975.   
Boughey, C., & McKenna, S. (2021). Understanding higher education: Alternative perspectives (p. 172). African Minds.   
ghey . . 012)     1(5) 641-653.   
Breshears, S. (2019). The precarious work of English language teaching in Canada. TESL Canada Journal, 36(2), 26-47.   
ue  (.        .), academic purposes in higher education: Politics, policies and practices (pp. 9-28). London: Bloomsbury Publishing.   
Burton, . (2021). lt, n , ollit, d omhdg the pw reions f  kn  the il y. Prane Paradigm, 16, 20-39.   
Brn, .  2) a p  ie d   h iih  of o  n, 434) 497-512. https://doi.org/10.1080/01425692.2022.2076387   
Callaghan  (2018). Th comn fa eret sto? F piisaion and prcis aour in th African do ol, 1), 82-91.   
Chetty, R. (2014). Clas dismised? Youth restance and the olitic f race and clss in outh African edcation. Criticl Arts, 29(1), 88-102.   
e, .1t     ri  ghis Plus, 57(1), 117-130.   
ce . 07  t th      51) 38-49.   
Clegg, S. (2009). Forms of knowing and academic development practice. Studies in Higher Education, 34(4), 403-416.   
Corcoran, J., & Williams, J. (2021). English for academic purposes in ontario: Results from an exploratory survey. Atanic, 23(7), 8.   
Councl o Higr tion (HE). 202). Rvw f higr ion   frica twnfive  i mcc. ia Sth Afri: tr.   
Courtis,  e15.r in th  gi  i k  thih hr  r.   ri Education Policy Studies, 13(1), 43-66.   
dw,  ric, 03s  t at thit. International Journal for Academic Development. https://doi.org/10.1080/1360144X.2023.2246443   
Danermark, B., Ekstrom, M., Jakobsen, L, & Karlsson, J.C. (2002). Explaining society: Criticl relism in th social sciences. Routledge.   
De il t.  e nr 6-ric Journal of Higher Education, 23(1), 43-68.   
Ding, A., & Bruce, I. (2017). The English for academic purposes practitioner. Palgrave Macmillan.   
insmore,  a 23) i      - h c  o 125(9), 84-107.   
Do (1997.  e r 05 197..   
Elshafei, M. 2022. Part-time language teachers and teaching qalit. Working papers in Applied Lingustics and ingustics at York 2, 13-20.   
tkan,, . 06.i g ii s 5 (1), 1-4.   
Hadley, G. (2015). English for academic purpose in neoliberal universities: A critical grounded theory. Springer.   
Hthway,  015. t    i o  he  hg  g   06517. https://doi.org/10.1080/13562517.2015.1026891   
Hyland, K. (2018). Sympathy for the devil? A defence of EAP. Language Teaching, 51(3), 383-399.   
Iaha15e y  e B-- 1, 394.   
oert, ) iot 22(1), 1-15. https://doi.org/10.14324/LRE.22.1.15.   
ert, South Africa: University of the Free State.   
dmos    024 i i g     th .s   g 31) 87-105.   
angr. 3. re t  g a //eenh3% A1n-kangataran/.   
Lange , y, , l .. (2021). ctiostll ia, t  oit on th dr. n     .a.) University on the border: Crisis of authority and precarity (pp. 1-12). African Sun Media.   
Loes, , an, I015. s h ct of  d r t  ge tin. h  of  h 7/, 28-42.   
Lorenz, C. .G. (2012).f yo 're art, wy ar yu der srelae: ritie, elilism d Public ament Ci nquy, 383) 599-629.   
MacDonald, J. (2016). The margins as third space: EAP teacher professonalism in Canadian universties. TESL Canada Journal 34(1), 106-116.   
Mason, O., & Megoran, N. (2021). Precarity and dehumanisation in higher education. Learning and Teaching, 14(1), 35-59.   
Onuebuze  J., ch,  L 2007) cal for qualitive pwer aaly. Qy d Q nio Jo of M, 41, 105-121.   
Schlossberg, N. K. (1989). Marginality and mattering: ey isue in building community. New Directions for Student Srvices, 48(1), 5-15.   
Sot . (0 r   r Media.   
Th , i    4    ch   f and Learning, 8(2), A43-A59. https://journal.aall.org.au/index.php/jall/article/view/301.   
Thorkelson, E. (2016). Precarity outside: The political unconscious of French academic labor. American Ethologist, 43(3), 405-586.   
l  t (1), 43-53. https://doi.org/10.1080/0309877X.2018.1499883   
Wigate, . 018  i r th r  ati itc   13 349364. /g 10.1017/S0261444816000264

iche e  t    t  tta vorked in the EAP field in the United Kingdom.