# What enhances EFL students’ participation in lecture discourse? Student, lecturer and discourse perspectives

Teresa Morell

Departamento de Filologı´a Inglesa, Universidad de Alicante, Campus de San Vicente del Raspeig, Apdo. de Correos 99, E-03080 Alicante, Spain

# Abstract

Lecture discourse has been conventionally known to be of a monological nature. However, lectures are more highly regarded if they allow for reciprocal discourse, especially for students of other languages who need help in understanding the content and in appropriating the language. In this paper, we will attempt a qualitative analysis of the interactive lecture discourse used by three lecturers and their non-native English speaking students of the English Studies Degree at the University of Alicante. The study includes a student survey, and a questionnaire given to lecturers to help us determine what are some of the conditions that will promote interaction between lecturers and students, as well as a summary of the beliefs of lecturers who habitually carry out interactive lectures. In combining the results of the diverse methodologies used, it was found that the presence of overt participation does not only depend on the participants’ awareness of the conditions that may promote it, but also on an educational system that compensates lecturers for their effectiveness and rewards students for their participation.

$©$ 2007 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Lecture discourse; Interaction; Discourse analysis; EFL content lectures; Interpersonal participatory features; English for academic purposes

# 1. Introduction

Lecture discourse has been conventionally known to be of a monologue nature. Traditionally, a lecture has been considered an institutionalized extended holding of the floor in which one speaker imparts his view on a subject using a slightly impersonal style (Goffman, 1981, p. 165). However, the use of English as the major language of academic communication in university lectures and in international conferences and seminars worldwide has had an impact on what may be considered the traditional lecture. Conversational style lectures (also called give-and-take, participatory or interactive), in which lecturers deliver the lecture from notes and in a relatively informal style with a certain amount of interaction with students (Dudley-Evans, 1994, p. 148) are becoming more common, especially where non-native listeners are concerned (Ferris & Tagg, 1996). These non-native speakers may be classified as either English as a Second Language (ESL) or English as a Foreign Language (EFL) students, that is, respectively, L2 speakers found in an English-speaking community and those found in places where English is not commonly used.

The use of conversational style lectures allows for interaction among lecturers and students. There are, of course, different degrees of interaction within lectures and distinct levels of asymmetrical power among participants. Therefore, to simplify matters, we will use the following definition of an interactive lecture:

y a classroom learning event for a large (more than 20) group of students primarily controlled and led by a lecturer and including subject input from the lecturer but also including varying degrees and types of oral participation by students. (Northcott, 2001, pp. 19–20)

According to Jordan (1997), in the US, there has traditionally been more interaction among lecturers and students than has been common in the UK. However, in other academic discourse studies (Basturkmen, 1999; Northcott, 2001) set within the UK, there is a consensus in the research literature on a general move towards a more interactive lecturing style that in many cases is preferred by L2 students as an aid to learning. Northcott (2001) claims that if students are permitted to ask questions within a lecture they may check their understanding.

Students’ comprehension of academic discourse has become an important focus of study especially due to the numbers of university students who are attending lectures held in English (Alcaraz Varo´ , 2000; Flowerdew, 1994; Flowerdew & Peacock, 2001; Jordan, 1997). Many of these studies have attempted to determine what variables of the lecture discourse play a role in improving non-native speakers’ understanding of the content. Among the variables are lecture schemata, speech modifications, use of visual aids, notetaking and interaction (Morell, 2000). To improve L2 students’ comprehension, studies on lecture discourse recommend that lecturers use, for example, accurate representation of the macro-structure (Tauroza & Allison, 1994; Olsen & Huckin, 1990) and discourse markers (e.g., Thompson, 2003), an adequate speech rate (Griffiths, 1990), repetitions (Chiang & Dunkel, 1992), and the possibility of negotiating meaning (Lynch, 1994; Morell, 2004).

Lectures have not only been studied to determine what will facilitate students’ comprehension, but also to examine their role as events that can be beneficial for the linguistic and communicative competence of second and foreign language students. Wesch and Ready (1985) claimed that ‘‘gains in second language proficiency are best achieved in situations where the second language is used as a vehicle for communication about other subjects rather than itself.’’ In other content lecture studies based in countries where English is not the official language (Griffiths, 1990; Morell, 2000), it has been found that in many cases interactive lectures will benefit EFL students not only in so far as their comprehension is concerned, but also in terms of improving their linguistic and communicative competence.

Furthermore, a number of recent studies on academic spoken discourse (Crawford Camiciottoli, 2004, 2005; Fortanet, 2004; Hincks, 2005; Hood & Forey, 2005; Miller, 2002; Morell, 2004; Recski, 2005; Webber, 2005) have focused on the interpersonal features and, for the most part, suggest that the tenor, that is, the relationship between the speaker and listeners, plays an essential part in establishing a comfortable context that will encourage participation. In addition, other studies have revealed the importance of the interpersonal relations established within spoken academic situations that will increase the non-native speakers willingness to communicate and in turn contribute to their successful acquisition of the second language (Kang, 2005).

Although very few studies on the interpersonal features of lectures have distinguished the characteristics of lectures for students in English communities (contexts with L1 and ESL students) with those in non-English speaking communities (contexts with L2 and EFL students), Crawford Camiciottoli (2004, 2005) has pointed out how content lectures in L2 settings require appropriate adjustments to aid comprehension.

On a more general level, although much more research has been carried out in written academic discourse, spoken academic discourse is becoming the focus of many studies, especially due to the available online classroom and non-classroom events corpus, for example the Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English (MICASE) (Simpson, Briggs, Ovens, & Swales, 2002), the British Academic Spoken English (BASE) corpus which is a developing lecture and seminar corpus (Nesi & Thompson, 2003), as well as the English as a Lingua Franca corpus (ELFA) (Mauranen, 2003). The possibilities of research in academic spoken English stemming from these corpuses provide an optimistic future for the field.

The particular study reported in this paper also comes from a corpus (although much smaller in comparison to those mentioned above) designed to analyze the discourse of EFL content lectures within an English Studies degree in a country where English is not an official language. This small scale corpus (approximately 45,000 words) has been the basis of several studies on the use of textual and interpersonal aspects found in a variety of lecture styles. Initially the corpus was used to distinguish between what the author called a non-interactive lecture style, where lecturers either read or had memorized the content of the discourse, and an interactive style, where the lecturer and the students contributed to the discourse. The effect of the different styles on students’ comprehension started as one of the main concerns since students of the specific degree need to understand both the subject matters and the language, as well as to progress in their linguistic and communicative competence.

Although the research in lecture discourse points to a general move towards the participatory style and to the benefits of students’ interactions for both their comprehension and progress in language competence, little has been published on how to enhance students’ participation in EFL contexts. This need for investigation can best be appreciated by lecturers who have experience teaching in either the US or the UK, where students are more accustomed to participating, and in other countries, such as Spain, where students are not used to contributing to the lecture discourse. This lack of interaction in most cases is due to a traditional educational system that is now beginning to change. Unfortunately, in many university contexts throughout the world, like that in Spain, lecturers are not trained in how to lecture nor are there internal or external examiners to assess their performance during lecture. Thus, many novice lecturers imitate what they have seen others do, that is, they follow a traditional non-interactive or monologue style.

Consequently, the present study aims to explore what will enhance EFL students’ participation, so as to aid novice lecturers, and those who wish to improve their approach to teaching, especially to students of other languages who need help in understanding the content and in appropriating the language. It is based on the sociocultural principle of language and learning that claims that the oral interaction that occurs between teachers and students and among students is especially consequential to the creation of learning environments (Hall & Verplaetse, 2000, p. 9). In order to determine what will encourage EFL students in a particular L2 environment to participate overtly (i.e., to produce verbal output), the study begins by exploring students’ and lecturers’ perceptions of participation within the lecture hall, and then analyzes the discourse of interactive lectures within the specific context.

# 2. Methodology

The main focus of this study was to explore what would promote interaction within lectures (between lecturers and students), in a specific L2 context. Taking inspiration from ethnographic research methodology, an attempt was made to combine a wide range of methodologies. The following research instruments were used to collect the data from the students, the lecturers and the lecture discourse:

an ethnographic description of the context; $\bullet$ surveys; $\bullet$ questionnaires; $\bullet$ focus group discussions; $\bullet$ a qualitative analysis of interactive discourse; $\bullet$ semi-structured interviews.

In a previous study (Morell, 2004), I compared the discourse of non-interactive and interactive lectures, that is, the linguistic (textual and interpersonal) aspects which differentiated what Dudley-Evans (1994) calls the ‘‘reading style’’ from the ‘‘conversational style’’ lectures. The lectures were labeled interactive and non-interactive according to the number and length of students’ interventions. In general, the interactive lectures had interventions (each of several utterances) from more than half of the total number of students present (and in some cases there were pair-work activities and in others chorus responses) within a $5 0 \mathrm { - } \mathrm { m i n }$ period. When three non-interactive lectures (i.e., monologue style) were compared with three interactive ones (i.e., conversational style), the interactive lectures were found to be characterized by a greater amount of personal pronouns, elicitation markers, display and referential questions, as well as the presence of negotiation of meaning. In the conclusion of that study, I made the following claim: ‘‘y for a lecturer to know about the linguistic aspects of interactive lecture discourse is not the only requisite for promoting participation. In fact, a lecturer’s attitude and beliefs towards the teaching and learning experience of content and language will determine, for the most part, the possibility of interactive discourse.’’ This claim follows through in Prosser and Trigwell, as cited in Miller (2002, p. 151): ‘‘As a way of investigating how effective lectures are in the L2 context, we need to look not only at linguistic features but also at the perceptions teachers and students have of their teaching/learning context, as it is these perceptions which help the stakeholders identify and construct the genre of lectures.’’ In the present study, I set out to explore the perspectives (beliefs and attitudes) of the participants of lectures in a specific context, as well as the discourse of three lectures that had previously been labeled interactive, to find a firm basis for my claim.

I will begin with a description that takes into account the participants’ teaching and learning context, language competence, experience and assumed needs. I, then, will proceed with the data gathered from the students and lecturers (see Section 3) and the qualitative findings of the discourse (see Section 4).

The aforementioned study (Morell, 2004) and the present one are part of a research project on enhancing EFL students’ oral participation that was carried out in the English Studies Department at the University of Alicante, Spain. The participants were undergraduate students, who were taking the (4-year) degree course, and lecturers, who teach and conduct research (one of which is the author of the present study), in English Studies.

The majority of the students are from the local area (the province of Alicante) and were in the third or fourth year of the English Studies degree at the time of the study. The choice of latter year students was made to avoid the effects of language proficiency on participation. For the most part, the students who took part in the study do not have problems in communicating in English, but need more practice. They were between the ages of 18 and 25, native speakers of Spanish and/or Catalan and had English as a school subject throughout their secondary and tertiary education. These students hope to acquire their degree to enter a field where expert use of the English language is required (e.g., teaching, international business, translating, etc.).

The lecturers who took part in the study were all members of the English Studies Department. They are all proficient users of the English language (6 native speakers and 22 non-native speakers) and their teaching experience at the university level ranged from 3 to 25 years. They all give lectures in linguistics, literature, language, history or culture using mostly English as their language of communication in the classroom. Their class sizes range from 20 to 80 students.

In the specific context of this investigation, the students have limited possibilities of putting their linguistic knowledge into practice since they do not live in an English speaking community. Furthermore, until recently most lectures in this context, or academic culture, were of a traditional monologue nature and students were expected to sit silently and take notes. Although some lecturers are attempting to promote overt participation, most report that getting the students to contribute to the discourse is an arduous task.

As will be noted below, the students’ perspectives were gathered through an open question to allow them to reflect on their own experience and to report on what they believed or what they remembered had promoted interaction in their classrooms. In contrast, the lecturers’ perspectives were determined via closed questions in a structured questionnaire and semi-structured interviews (see Section 4.1) since they are the experienced professionals who are concerned with lecturing effectively and can therefore provide us with concrete information on linguistic competence, class size, questioning, questioning time, student participation, and type of discourse.

# 3. Students’ and lecturers’ perceptions on interaction in lectures

As a first resort to determine what will promote interaction, two different groups of fourth year students, who were attending their English language class at the beginning of the academic year were informed of the research project and were asked for their collaboration. The 65 students who were in their fourth and, for the most part, last year of the degree course were asked to write down what they considered to be the characteristics of a content-based lecture (or lecturer) in English that would encourage them to participate actively (overtly). The reason for having chosen these students, and not those of the earlier years of the degree, was that they are more familiar with the cultural dimensions (i.e., the ethnic, local, academic, and disciplinary culture) of the particular educational setting (Flowerdew & Miller, 1995) and are, therefore, better able to give meditated responses. The students were told not to write their names on the paper and to respond in the language of their preference (i.e., Spanish, Catalan or English), so that they could respond freely without any inhibitions caused by lack of self-confidence or insufficient language competence. Each student wrote their own perspective on interaction in lectures and on what would encourage them to participate. The categories, which summarize the student responses in Table 1, were not preconceived but brought forth by a number of the students. Each of the characteristics noted by the students is listed in rank order. As can be seen in Table 1, the aspects that the students considered to play an important role in class participation were: the incorporation of participatory activities, the use of relevant topics, the lecturer’s level of enthusiasm, the classroom atmosphere, the use of questioning, the lecturer’s intention of getting to know the students, and class-size.

In the case of the lecturers a more formal questionnaire was prepared after having reviewed the literature on classroom interaction, noted the students’ responses, and carried out several focus group discussions with colleagues who were also interested in enhancing their students’ participation. The questions were formulated to have a global view of the context in which each of the lecturers was involved. The questionnaires, which were put into the lecturers’ mailboxes, were accompanied by a written explanation of the goals of the research. They were asked to fill out the questions taking into account their own groups of students and lectures. Twenty-eight out of the 40 lecturers who were asked for their contributions completed the questionnaires. Each item of the questionnaire had four possible responses (1—I strongly agree, 2—I agree, 3—I disagree, 4—I strongly disagree) as well as a few lines for extra comments. Table 2 shows the percentage results of the first six items of the questionnaire and the comments for seventh item which was an open question.

Table 1 Students’ perspectives on the characteristics of lectures that promote participation   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Characteristics</td><td>Number of students (n = 65)</td><td>Percentage of students</td></tr><tr><td>Certain activities (e.g., debates, group work, role plays)</td><td>19</td><td>29.2</td></tr><tr><td>Interesting topics (related to the students).</td><td>18</td><td>27.7</td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer is enthusiastic and makes you feel at ease</td><td>17</td><td>26.2</td></tr><tr><td>Uninhibited classroom atmosphere</td><td>10</td><td>15.4</td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer asks questions and insists on participation</td><td>9</td><td>13.8</td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer attempts to get to know the students.</td><td>7</td><td>10.8</td></tr><tr><td>The group is small.</td><td>4</td><td>6.2</td></tr></table></body></html>

Note: These categories were not preconceived. They emerged from the students’ responses.

Although the lecturers gave a range of responses we can deduce general tendencies. The majority of the participants $( 6 5 \% )$ believe that their students possess an adequate linguistic competence to understand the lecture discourse in English. However, a substantial number $( 3 5 \% )$ think that their students are unable to understand lecture discourse in English and therefore, conduct their content lectures either solely or partially in Spanish. These lecturers have students in their first or second year of the degree course who often have a lower proficiency level. Thus, it appears that proficiency level may be a factor affecting the amount of student participation.

Unlike Hansen and Jensen (1994, p. 246) who claim that class size will determine student participation, many of the lecturers $( 6 6 \% )$ , who participated in this study, believe that the size of the class does not stop them from having students contribute to the discourse. These lecturers, for the most part, agree with the students’ suggestion that there will be a greater tendency to participate if certain activities are included during class time (e.g., pair work, group work, and debates). Nearly all the lecturers $( 9 2 \% )$ claim to ask questions during the

Table 2 Lecturers’ responses to questionnaire items on students’ participation in lectures   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Item</td><td>I strongly agree (%)</td><td>I agree (%)</td><td>1 disagree (%)</td><td>I strongly disagree (%)</td></tr><tr><td>1. Generally speaking, my students have an adequate linguistic competence to follow my lectures in English</td><td>4</td><td>61</td><td>23</td><td>12</td></tr><tr><td>2. Generally speaking, the size of my classes do not stop me</td><td>12</td><td>54</td><td>19</td><td>15</td></tr><tr><td>from making my students participate 3. I tend to ask questions in class and use the students&#x27; responses to follow through with the lecture</td><td>37</td><td>55</td><td>8</td><td>0</td></tr><tr><td>4. I prefer that the students ask questions at the end of the lecture</td><td>4</td><td>18</td><td>52</td><td>26</td></tr><tr><td>5. Students participate actively in my classes</td><td>7</td><td>37</td><td>52</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>6. Although not all students participate, some do when certain activities are used</td><td>22</td><td>70</td><td>8</td><td>0</td></tr></table></body></html>

- topics related to their age group, to the media, to leisure activities, to their personal interests (values, queries relations)   
- direct questions, closed questions, open questions, many questions   
- practical exercises, pair work, group work, debates, comparing arguments   
- polite, humorous and informal tone   
- obliged or rewarded participation   
- includes anecdotes and lecturers’ personal information   
- the discourse should be clear, well-developed, understandable, lively and it should include pauses   
- student responses should obtain constructive feedback

lecture and try to follow up on the students’ responses in their discourse. It is also true that most of the lecturers $( 7 8 \% )$ do not believe that the students should wait until the end of the lecture to ask any questions. It is worth mentioning that there was not an agreement as to what kinds of questions the students would be more likely to answer. As indicated in Table 2 (item 7), some lecturers believe that students answer closed questions (those that are directed to individuals that only require limited and often short responses), whereas others claim that open questions (those offered to the class in general with many possible answers) are more likely to receive responses. However, according to Brock (1986) and Morell (2004), open questions which are often referential questions (real questions to which the lecturer does not know the response—e.g., What have you read in relation to this topic?) rather than display questions (those which test to see if students know the material at hand—e.g., What is the answer to number 2?), will promote more and longer responses. Nevertheless, the lecturers who claim that the discourse should contain closed questions were probably referring to the type of questions that they more often use or that they have received responses for. After all, responding with one or two words requires a smaller risk of losing face than responding with a longer utterance. In any case, few lecturers are aware of the different types of questions that they either use or that can be used, for this reason in the questionnaire responses, there was no mention of referential and display questions or the different ways of negotiating meaning (Morell, 2004).

In contrast to the willingness to use questions and to allow for them, $60 \%$ of those who responded state that their students do not participate actively, that is, they do not respond to questions or contribute to the discourse. This is what triggered the need to find out what happens in those lectures where the students participate. In the same questionnaire, the lecturers were asked if they would be willing to permit their classes to be observed and/or recorded and, much to our satisfaction, the majority agreed. Therefore, we soon started to audio record classes.

# 4. A qualitative analysis of interactive lecture discourse

In total, 15 classes were audio recorded, analyzed and categorized on a continuum of student participation. In other words, the classes were classified according to the number of student interventions. In this particular study, as mentioned before, we only reflected upon the qualitative aspects of the three most interactive lectures (i.e., those in which more than half of the students intervened, included pair-work or had chorus responses within a $5 0 \mathrm { - } \mathrm { m i n }$ session). It is important to point out that many of the students who took part in these interactive lectures also filled out the questionnaire. These three classes were transcribed, word for word, by the researcher using some of the coding conventions found in Hatch (1992), as well as simplified conversation analysis transcription conventions. The lectures, described in Table 3, have been labeled Int A, Int B, and Int C (Int: Interactive) for analytical purposes.

Among the features shared by these lectures, which in some cases were not found in the non-interactive lectures, were:

(1) The lecturers used clear and slow speech with a primarily questioning tone.   
(2) They began the session with a statement or question that referred to the main objective(s).   
(3) All three included personal interactions: anecdotes, use of humor, petitions for personal opinion or examples, and positive feedback on responses made by students.

Table 3 Description of analyzed interactive lectures   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Lecture</td><td>Int A</td><td>Int B</td><td>Int C</td></tr><tr><td>Subject</td><td>Interpretation</td><td>Sociolinguistics</td><td>Drama applied to the. Language classroom</td></tr><tr><td>Topic</td><td>Community interpreting</td><td>Face threatening acts</td><td>Jazz chants</td></tr><tr><td>Year of degree</td><td>4th</td><td>4th</td><td>3rd and 4th</td></tr><tr><td>Number of students.</td><td>21</td><td>62</td><td>75</td></tr><tr><td>Lecturer</td><td>Female, native speaker (15 years experience)</td><td>Female, non-native speaker (10 years experience)</td><td>Female, non-native speaker (16 years experience)</td></tr></table></body></html>

Each of these features is elaborated in the following paragraphs, which contain stretches of discourse to exemplify their use within Int A, Int B, or Int C.

(1) The lecturers used clear and slow speech with a primarily questioning tone.

We describe the lecturers’ speech as clear since in all three cases there was no problem in transcribing word for word what was said (although this was not true for all of the students’ interventions in the discourse). In the cases of Int A and Int C, English was used at all times, however in Int B the lecturer used Spanish from time to time when a more in depth explanation was needed. The speech rate of the three lecturers in our study ranged roughly from 80 to 100 words per minute, which is considered to be slower than normal, according to Tauroza and Allison (1990), who have classified a range of speech rates for lecturers’ speaking to non-native students in conversational style lectures.

The lecturers’ tendency to use questions or to elicit information from the students was made apparent not only through the abundance of questions used but also by the rising intonation found at the end of many utterances. This feature was not found in the noninteractive lectures.

(2) They began the session with a statement or question which referred to the main objective(s) of the lecture.

This characteristic of beginning the class by stating the main goal of the lecture is in line with the results found in Thompson (1994), in which the introductions of lectures from different fields were analyzed using the techniques of genre analysis.

In the three lectures of the present study we found the two main rhetorical functions and several subfunctions identified by Thompson. In the case of Int A, the lecturer began with putting the topic in context by referring to the previous lecture and then set up the lecture framework by announcing the topic in the form of a question.

Today what I want to do is pick up where we left off last week. We were looking at the domains that we had created for consecutivey. Have you all heard of community interpreting? OK. Does anybody want to give a stab in the dark of what that might be? (Int A, lines 1–17)

The lecturer in Int B also started with putting the topic in context by reviewing the session from the day before and then set up the lecture framework by asking the students to provide an example of the type of speech act that would be the focus of that day’s class.

We’re going to start by a short review to remember what we talked about yesterday. Yesterday we were discussing face friendly acts y To start today’s session, I wanted to ask you to think of an example of a speech act that potentially threatens the face of any of the participants involved in the conversation, in the discourse, in the communication. You may talk to your fellow students about this. I will give you 2 or 3 min. (Int B, lines 1–13)

The lecturer in Int C combined setting up the framework with putting the topic in context by first stating that they were starting a new topic and then outlining the structure of the session, relating the given information on the handouts with the questions that would constitute the main focus of the class.

We have a new lesson, so as a warm up today I’m going to give you five-minutes to have a look at the handout and you must try and solve the following queries: What is a jazz chant? y How does a jazz chant work? y What do you think of the advantages of using jazz chants in the English class? Five minutes that we’ll try and solve these questions together and in the second part of today’s lesson we will be practicing jazz chants. OK? (Int C, lines 1–10)

In contrast to the introductions analyzed in Thompson (1994), the lecturers in the beginning of these three sessions made it clear to the students that the discourse would be co-created. In other words, they questioned the students so as to lead them to reflect upon their encyclopedic knowledge (Int A and Int B) or the information that had been previously provided in handouts (Int C), so that they could contribute to the development of the session. In addition, they all used the inclusive personal pronoun ‘we’ indicating that it would be a collaborative event. It was also found that the lecturers used questions to introduce the main idea at the beginning of the lecture as well as whenever they started a new subtopic during the 50-min lesson.

(3) All three included personal interactions: anecdotes, use of humor, petitions for personal opinion or examples, and positive feedback on responses made by students.

In each lecture there were several instances in which the lecturer made a personal reference to one or more students. For example, in Int A as the session began the lecturer turned to two of the students and said the following:

How are you ladies today? Have you eaten? Yes? I have not. I might as well be on Ramadan (L & SSS laughter). Anyway, we’re glad you’ve eaten and we’re glad you’re feeling full. (Int A, lines 4–5)

The lecturer’s straightforward demonstration of empathy and her disposition to share her own personal situation is in line with the interpersonal strategies discussed in Flowerdew and Miller (1996). This personalization, in which the lecturer portrays her character to the audience by making references to herself and to what she and her students may or may not have in common, helps to develop rapport.

These personal interactions were often accompanied by laughter coming from the participants. In Int C, for example, when the students had read the handouts describing jazz chants and when the lecturer was trying to elicit what jazz chants are, the following interaction took place:

$\mathrm { { L } = }$ lecturer, $\mathbf { S } =$ student, and $\mathbf { S } \mathbf { S } =$ several students)   
L: What do you think jazz chants are?   
S: A reflection of emotions   
L: So they reflect emotions. In order to reflect these emotions we need something. What   
do we need?   
S: We need breathing   
L: We need breathing?   
S: We need rhythm (laughter)   
L & SS: (laughter)   
L: We need rhythm aha. We need rhythm. Let’s make a jazz chant. As you see we are   
about to make a cocktail. Ok, so we put some emotions. OK. Then we put a little bit of   
rhythm, and what else? Pepper? Salt?   
SS: (laughter)   
L: What else do we need? Emotions and rhythm. But with emotions and rhythm, how   
do we make stress through rhythm? I need y   
S: Words   
L: I need words   
S: Intonation   
L: A situation. (Lecturer purposely imitated the student’s intonation using a rhyming   
word) More ‘ations’?   
L & SS: (laughter)   
(Int C, lines 11–28)

The first instance of laughter came from a student’s mistaken use of the word ‘‘breathing in place of rhythm.’’ Here the lecturer repeated the student’s contribution with a questioning tone and the student quickly corrected himself and laughed, triggering the laughter of the rest of the audience. In the second instance the lecturer used a familiar cooking schema referring metaphorically to the ingredients of a jazz chant. The third instance of laughter was derived from the lecturer’s play on words with the familiar suffix ‘‘ation.’’ Each of these moments of laughter in the session seems to demonstrate the relaxed environment present in the lecture hall and gives evidence of the positive rapport between the students and the lecturer. In addition, laughter functions as a release of tension, and an absence of it, according to Flowerdew and Miller (1996, p. 135), may result in a heightening of tension, and such tension is likely to exacerbate the difficulties many students report experiencing in concentrating.

This stretch of discourse (Int C, lines 11–28) does not only demonstrate the use of humor, but also the spontaneity required in carrying out an interactive lecture. At all times the instructor needs to be in tune with the students’ responses so as to prompt or elicit the discourse that will lead them towards the predetermined objectives. The elicitation of the students’ personal opinions or examples also demonstrates how the lecturers use the students’ input to develop the discourse. In Int A, for example, the lecturer was aware of the fact that several students were of different cultural backgrounds and they had distinct experiential knowledge of community interpreting. Thus, when she was attempting to make her students aware of the differences between the task of an interpreter in a formal situation, such as that of interpreting for conferences, and that of community interpreters, she relied on the students’ experiential knowledge. The following extract exemplifies:

L: How would you guess that the interpreting function itself might differ in hospitals or immigration offices from the way we would use consecutive interpreting in conferences or meetings?   
S1: In situations in hospitals and offices you have more opportunities or questions back and forth and the chance to understand how people really feel.   
L: Absolutely!   
S2: Less stress   
L: Well, what do you think? Less stress? Why?   
S3: Yes, well because it’s not a formal situation and as Alexandra said you can ask one person or the other if you don’t understand something or if you need further information.   
(Int A, lines 25–34)

In this excerpt we can also note the lecturer’s use of positive feedback. After the first student’s intervention, the lecturer said, ‘‘Absolutely!’’ strongly reaffirming the student’s contribution. In the second intervention, the lecturer did not evaluate, but instead opened the dialogue to the other students by stating, ‘‘Well, what do you think?’’ and allowed another student to intervene, and thus permitted different students to express their thoughts and opinions. Therefore, in this set of interactions, the lecturer took on the role of questioner, affirmer, and clarifier, as was also pointed out in the discourse analyzed in Boyd and Maloof (2000, p. 177). In so doing, the lecturer encouraged students to use their personal sources to make meaning.

Similarly, in the following excerpt taken from Int C, we can also observe the lecturer’s petition for the students’ examples, and her positive feedback.

L: How about for the socialization stage? What do you think a jazz chant can provide students with? (4 sec)   
S1: Because we use games   
L: Exactly, we can expand the jazz chant and design as Marina is saying suitable games. What else? Role plays?   
S2: Improvisation   
L: Yes, role-plays, improvisations convey students a situational context in which they can put into practice what they have already learned at the chant. OK. How about individualization? Do you think jazz chants can be effective? Why?   
S3: We can design a follow up activities.   
L: Yes, we can design follow up activities that students can do for homework y (Int C, lines 93–103)

The instructor’s thought-provoking questions were answered by students who provided acceptable responses and, in each case they, and their classmates, received positive reinforcement and encouragement for further contributions. It is important to highlight that this feedback was given in response to the content contributed by the students and not to the language used, as would be the case in a language class. However, in many cases content lecturers of non-native students have to make a decision, whether to correct language errors students make in giving responses or to ignore them. For example, in Int C (lines 102–103, above) Student 3 (S3) incorrectly used the indefinite article, ‘‘a’’ in front of ‘‘follow up activities,’’ yet when the lecturer responded to her contribution she said, ‘‘Yes, we can design follow up activities y’’ Thus, the lecturer made the decision to give positive direct feedback on the meaning of the contribution and, what may be considered, indirect negative feedback on the form. This was done by giving an affirmative response together with a corrected repetition of the student’s contribution. In so doing, the linguistic error was treated as a ‘‘pragmatic’’ or interactional adjustment, not as a normative redress (Kramsch, 1987, p. 23). Consequently, the student did not lose face and would not feel inhibited to make other contributions in future occasions.

# 4.1. Interviews with lecturers that promote interaction

The lecturers of Int A, Int B, and Int C, who were also members of the focus group discussions, participated in a semi-structured interview and were asked why they thought students participated in their classes. They all attributed it to the type of atmosphere they try to create and with the way they deal with errors. In all three cases, they alluded to the establishment of a comfortable, non-threatening class atmosphere. According to the lecturer of Int C, this secure environment was created by fostering mutual trust and respect, solidarity, friendliness, self-reliance, and self-esteem. The metaphor she used for the classroom was that of a ‘‘safe laboratory,’’ in which there is no such thing as a right or wrong way of doing things, and mistakes/errors are considered to be an essential part of the learning process. Similarly, the lecturer of Int B stated that we can encourage students to participate if we are not hypercritical with their errors, and that all kinds of errors, be they the students’ or the lecturer’s, can be used as a source for further elaboration and for the promotion of ‘real’ communication and discussion of the content. This authentic interaction, in the words of Int A’s lecturer, is promoted if the lecturer is dynamic, takes chances, admits mistakes, and gracefully handles students’ nerves and errors.

# 5. Pedagogical implications and conclusions

In this qualitative study, we have used a range of methods to determine what conditions will promote interaction (i.e., overt linguistic interchanges) between lecturers and EFL students. This has been done because findings in second language acquisition studies claim that if language learners are not only exposed to the target language, but also encouraged to produce output and to interact, they will more likely progress in their linguistic and communicative competence. In addition, allowing students to interrupt and ask for clarifications, which is typical in interactive lectures, will obviously aid comprehension. Therefore, participatory lectures are beneficial for EFL students, especially for those who major in English Studies.

However, willingness to carry out interactive lectures will not guarantee their success, especially in a context where traditional lectures have prevailed until recently. For this reason, we set out to use a variety of instruments that took into account the three components of any lecture: the students, the lecture and the discourse, to obtain a holistic view of the particular context.

The results obtained from the three perspectives confirm the expectations of experienced lecturers who have been trained to carry out interactive lectures. The findings from each of the methodologies used converge in the following: EFL students’ participation is dependent on the activities that the lecturers allow them to take part in and on the receptiveness of the students, which is determined by the lecturers’ sense of empathy. In other words, as may be considered obvious by most qualified lecturers, instructors who wish to carry out interactive lectures need to be concerned with not only the ideational aspects, i.e., the informational content, but also the interpersonal aspects, or everything that plays a role in establishing a relationship between the lecturer and the students. As can be inferred from the interviews of the three lecturers that carried out participatory sessions, lecturers’ perception of themselves as facilitators of both content and language plays an important role in promoting EFL student participation.

Nevertheless, after having been guided by several clear thinking reviewers and having crossed examined the results obtained from the diverse methodologies; I realize that the most interesting findings of this study are not in the convergence of the results but in their divergence. In revising the results as separate entities (i.e., surveys, questionnaires, interviews, etc.) the findings only confirm what other researchers have found. Yet, when overlapping the information obtained from the participants who took part in several components of the study, more elucidating conclusions can be drawn.

In several cases the information obtained from the answers in the questionnaire, the lecture recording and the interview did not seem to coincide. For example, in one case, a lecturer’s responses to the questionnaire indicated that he was aware of what would enhance EFL students’ participation; in contrast his lecture recording was a straight monologue. When he was interviewed, he explained that he was concerned about not having enough time to cover the contents of the course syllabus, and that his job was to transfer information and not to carry out a social gathering. Another instance of lack of consistency in the results obtained from the different instruments was found in the contributions of several students who agreed that if the right conditions existed (i.e., group activities, debates, a comfortable environment, etc.) interaction would be promoted; however, when these students were in such classes they did not participate. In one case, the student claimed that her lack of participation had not prevented her from obtaining good grades. In other words, participation was not a requisite in most of her classes.

Thus, a more thorough and cross examination of the results obtained brings us beyond the findings of other studies. Much like in many other contexts, the students’ and lecturers’ perspectives point to the need to involve the students in set activities, to relate the academic material with the students’ personal interests, and to ask and encourage questions. However, in this context, although the above conditions are agreed upon by many lecturers and students, it is very often the case that classroom interaction is limited or does not exist. Therefore, we may deduce that the presence of active overt participation does not only depend on the lecturers’ awareness of the conditions that may promote it, but also on an educational system that trains and compensates lecturers for effective teaching. In addition, students will be further motivated to interact within university classrooms if participation is accounted for within the evaluation of the course.

# Acknowledgments

This paper reports on a study carried out by the author within a larger project of an established research group called IIPA (Instituto del Ingle´s Profesional y Acade´mico, i.e., The Institute of Professional and Academic English). A modified version of this paper was presented at the AILA 14th World Conference of Applied Linguistics in Madison, Wisconsin, in July 2005. The author would like to express her gratitude to the lecturers and students who collaborated in this research. The constructive criticism of Ken Hyland and three anonymous reviewers is gratefully acknowledged.

# References

Alcaraz Varo´ , E. (2000). El ingle´s profesional y acade´mico. Madrid: Alianza Editorial.   
Basturkmen, H. (1999). Discourse in MBA seminars: Towards a description for pedagogical purposes. English for Specific Purposes, 18(1), 63–80.   
Boyd, M., & Maloof, V. M. (2000). How teachers can build on student-proposed intertextual links to facilitate student talk in the ESL classroom. In J. Hall, & L. Verplaetse (Eds.), Second and foreign language learning through classroom interaction (pp. 163–182). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum.   
Brock, C. (1986). The effects of referential questions on ESL classroom discourse. TESOL Quarterly, 20(1), 47–59.   
Chiang, C. S., & Dunkel, P. (1992). The effect of speech modification, prior knowledge and listening proficiency on EFL lecture learning. TESOL Quarterly, 26(2), 345–374.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2004). Interactive discourse structuring in L2 guest lectures: Some insights from a comparative corpus-based study. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 3(1), 39–54.   
Crawford Camiciottoli, B. (2005). Adjusting a business lecture for an international audience: A case study. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 183–199.   
Dudley-Evans, T. (1994). Variations in discourse patterns. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 146–158). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Ferris, D., & Tagg, T. (1996). Academic oral communication needs of EAP learners: What subject-matter instructors actually require. TESOL Quarterly, 30(1), 31–57.   
Flowerdew, J. (Ed.). (1994). Academic listening: Research perspectives. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1995). On the notion of culture in L2 lectures. TESOL Quarterly, 29(2), 345–373.   
Flowerdew, J., & Miller, L. (1996). Lectures in a second language: Notes toward a cultural grammar. English for Specific Purposes, 15(2), 121–140.   
Flowerdew, J., & Peacock, M. (Eds.). (2001). Research perspectives on English for academic purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Fortanet, I. (2004). The use of ‘we’ in university lectures. Reference and function. English for Specific Purposes, 23, 45–66.   
Goffman, E. (1981). The lecture. In E. Goffman (Ed.), Forms of talk (pp. 162–195). Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press.   
Griffiths, R. (1990). Speech rate and NNS comprehension: A preliminary study in time-benefit analysis. Language Learning, 40(3), 311–336.   
Hall, J., & Verplaetse, L. (Eds.). (2000). Second and foreign language learning through classroom interaction. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.   
Hansen, C., & Jensen, C. (1994). Evaluating lecture comprehension. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 241–269). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hatch, E. (1992). Discourse and language education. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Hincks, R. (2005). Measures and perceptions of liveliness in student oral presentation speech: Proposal for an automatic feedback mechanism. System, 33, 575–591.   
Hood, S., & Forey, G. (2005). Introducing a conference paper: Getting interpersonal with your audience. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 4(4), 291–306.   
Jordan, R. R. (Ed.). (1997). English for academic purposes. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Kang, S. (2005). Dynamic emergence of situational willingness to communicate in a second language. System, 33, 277–292.   
Kramsch, C. J. (1987). Interactive discourse in small and large groups. In W. Rivers (Ed.), Interactive language teaching (pp. 17–30). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Lynch, T. (1994). Training lectures for international audiences. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 269–289). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Mauranen, A. (2003). The corpus of English as lingua franca in academic settings. TESOL Quarterly, 37(3), 513–527.   
Miller, L. (2002). Towards a model for lecturing in a second language. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 1, 145–162.   
Morell, T. (2000). EFL content lectures: A discourse analysis of an interactive and a non-interactive style. Working papers 7. Alicante, Spain: Departamento de Filologı´ a Inglesa, Universidad de Alicante.   
Morell, T. (2004). Interactive lecture discourse for EFL students. English for Specific Purposes, 23(3), 325–338.   
Nesi, H., & Thompson, P. (2003). The British Academic Spoken English (BASE) corpus. Retrieved from http:// www.rdg.ac.uk/slals/base/   
Northcott, J. (2001). Towards an ethnography of the MBA classroom: A consideration of the role of interactive lecturing styles within the context of one MBA programme. English for Specific Purposes, 20, 15–37.   
Olsen, L. A., & Huckin, T. N. (1990). Point-driven understanding in engineering lecture comprehension. English for Specific Purposes, 9, 33–47.   
Recski, L. (2005). Interpersonal engagement in academic spoken discourse: A functional account of dissertation defenses. English for Specific Purposes, 24(1), 5–23.   
Simpson, R. C., Briggs, S. L., Ovens, J., & Swales, J. (2002). Michigan Corpus of Academic Spoken English. Ann Arbor, MI: The Regents of the University of Michigan Retrieved from http://micase.umdl.umich.edu/m/ micase/   
Tauroza, S., & Allison, D. (1990). Speech rates in British English. Applied Linguistics, 11(1), 90–105.   
Tauroza, S., & Allison, D. (1994). Expectation driven understanding in information systems lecture comprehension. In J. Flowerdew (Ed.), Academic listening: Research perspectives (pp. 35–54). Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.   
Thompson, S. (1994). Frameworks and contexts: A genre-based approach to analyzing lecture introductions. English for Specific Purposes, 13(2), 171–187.   
Thompson, S. E. (2003). Text-structuring metadiscourse, intonation and the signalling of organisation in academic lectures. Journal of English for Academic Purposes, 2(1), 5–20.   
Webber, P. (2005). Interactive features in medical conference monologue. English for Specific Purposes, 24, 157–181.   
Wesch, M., & Ready, D. (1985). Foreigner talk in the university classroom. In S. Gass, & J. Madden (Eds.), Input in second language acquisition (pp. 89–144). Rowley, MA: Newbury House.