# Teaching coherence to ESL students: a classroom inquiry

Icy Lee

Department of Education Studies, Hong Kong Baptist University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

# Abstract

"Coherence" is traditionally described as the relationships that link the ideas in a text to create meaning for the readers. It is often regarded as a fuzzy concept which is difficult to teach and learn. This paper describes a classroom inquiry which investigated the teaching of coherence. In this study, coherence was defined in terms of a number of coherencecreating devices, and pedagogical materials were designed accordingly to teach the concept to a group of 16 ESL university students in Hong Kong. Data was collected from their preand post-revision drafts, think-aloud protocols during revisions, as well as post-study questionnaires and interviews. The findings suggest that at the end of the explicit teaching of coherence, students improved the coherence of their writing and directed their attention to the discourse level of texts while revising. They also felt that the teaching of coherence had enhanced their awareness of what effective writing should entail. The paper concludes with insights gained from the classroom inquiry.

$©$ 2002 Elsevier Science Inc. All rights reserved.

Keywords: Teaching; Coherence; ESL students

# Introduction

"Coherence"' is an important quality of effective writing (Bamberg, 1984; Richards, 1990). However, it is often considered an abstract and fuzzy concept (Connor, 1990; Roberts & Kreuz, 1993) which is difficult to teach and difficult to learn:

Although most teachers consider coherence an essential element of good writing, it remains difficult to teach. Teachers acclaim its benefits, demonstrate its effects, and exemplify good models, but students still do not know how to write coherently. (Cerniglia, Medsker, & Connor, 1990, p. 229)

More recently, Grabe and Kaplan (1996) have pointed out the controversial nature of coherence: "There is little consensus on the matter of an overall definition of coherence" (p. 67). In the writing classroom, ESL teachers tend to refer to "coherence" in abstract terms without making a systematic attempt to explain and to teach it, saying, for instance, your writing is not coherent; your writing lacks unity; the ideas don't hang together; the ideas are disorganised. However, what exactly is meant by coherence? Can students improve the coherence of their writing just by being told in vague terms that their writing is not coherent? Should coherence be explicitly taught, and if so, how? Smagorinsky and Smith (1998) say that "practice and research should have a symbiotic relationship" (p. 5). This classroom inquiry is an attempt, for me as a teacher, to cope with a major problem I have faced in the writing classroom, and this provided the impetus and point of departure for the investigation.

# Defining coherence

# Early conceptions of coherence

Attempts to define coherence can be traced to the 19th century, when the predominant emphasis was put on sentence connections and paragraph structure. Bain (1890), for example, defined coherence in terms of between-sentence connections that create tightly-structured and autonomous paragraphs, which are then linked together into a larger text by transition devices. Such conceptions, however, construe coherence narrowly in terms of sentence-level connectedness and paragraph unity rather than discourse unity. They reflect the major emphasis of many ESL writing textbooks which teach sentence-level grammar rather than coherence in a broader sense (e.g., Langan, 1996; Oshima & Hogue, 1991).

# Influences of discourse analysis and textlinguistics

The emergence of studies in discourse analysis in the 1960s shifted the emphasis of writing research from the sentence and its constituents to the larger principles of discourse -- namely, principles that tie sentences to one another and to the context in which the text occurs (de Beaugrande & Dressler, 1981; McCarthy, 2001; Scardamalia & Bereiter, 1986). Textlinguistics, among the many other branches of discourse analysis, has, in particular, broadened our understanding of the concept of coherence. Central to textlinguistic research is the notion of "text," which is a "multidimensional construct" conveying meaning at different levels (Grabe & Kaplan, 1996; Halliday & Hasan, 1985; Hatim & Mason, 1990; Hymes, 1972). Grabe and Kaplan (1996) maintain that "a theory of coherence is important to any model of text construction'' (p. 61). "Coherence" should, therefore, derive its meaning from what a text is and how a text is constructed. It can be considered in two different ways: as internal to the text and as internal to the reader.

# Coherence as internal to the text

Coherence can be defined in terms of the formal properties of the text. In their theory of "cohesion,' Halliday and Hasan (1976) look to the formal properties of language in their attempts to explain "texture,' with which the notion of coherence is often equated. According to Halliday and Hasan, the linguistic signals of cohesion can help writers achieve connectivity of the surface text and guide the reader to establish the coherent interpretation intended by the writer (also see Halliday & Hasan, 1989). Functional Sentence Perspective (see Danes, 1974; Firbas, 1986) introduces the notion of theme and rheme (see Halliday, 1985, 1994), also referred to as given and new (Vande Kopple, 1983, 1986), or topic and comment (Connor & Farmer, 1990; Lautamatti, 1987), and connects it to the information structure and its relation to text coherence. From the pattern of topiccomment progression, Lautamatti (1987) and subsequently Connor and Farmer (1990) recommend topical structure analysis as a tool for analyzing the coherence of writing. On the other hand, Kintsch and van Dijk (1978) describe coherence in terms of the propositions that make up a text and the ordering of the propositions (microstructures) to form the macrostructure of texts, creating global coherence. Thus, coherence lies beyond the surface structure of texts often characterized by cohesion and information structure and can be conceived in terms of the under1ying relations that hold between assertions and how these assertions contribute to the overall discourse topic (i.e., macrostructure). Hoey (1983, 1991) looks at both the lexical patterns and the macrostructure (i.e., discourse organization) to explain the coherence of texts. Other linguists have looked to some metadiscoursal features in the texts (e.g., logical connectors, sequencers, hedges) that help readers organize and interpret the information (e.g., Cheng & Steffensen, 1996; Crismore, Markkanen, & Steffensen, 1993) and how they contribute to the coherence of texts. From the linguistic perspective, therefore, coherence can be said to be internal to the text, adding to our understanding of what a text is.

# Coherence as internal to the reader

Over the last two decades, research in psychology, linguistics, and applied linguistics has focused on the role of the reader in constructing the coherence of texts. Modern reading theories maintain that text processing is an interaction between the reader and the text and that readers employ their knowledge of the world (content schemata) and knowledge of text structures (formal schemata) to make sense of a text (Carrell, 1988). Research on artificial intelligence has demonstrated that we make use of conventional knowledge structures known as scripts, frames, or schemas in organizing experience and knowledge (Dehn & Schank, 1982). According to Bamberg (1983), these knowledge structures "help readers anticipate upcoming textual information, thereby enabling them to reduce and organize the text into an understandable and coherent whole' (p. 419). Brown and Yule (1983) have also highlighted the role of the reader in establishing coherence: " ... what the textual record means is determined by our interpretation of what the producer intended it to mean"' (Brown & Yule, 1983, p. 25). On the other hand, researchers in pragmatics and conversational analysis maintain that coherence is at least partly based on the readers' ability to make inferences from the texts, irrespective of the text structure itself (Garnham, 1985; Oakhill & Garnham, 1988). Nonetheless, the readers' attempts at inferences in the process of constructing textual coherence may be triggered by formal elements in the text (Britton & Gulgoz, 1991; Singer, 1990).

While a cognitive theory of discourse supports the notion that coherence is a matter of interaction between the text and the reader's knowledge base, another source of the non-linguistic nature of coherence is derived from an interactional theory of discourse. In this view, coherence is based on the readers' understanding of the writer's intentions, the context of writing, and the relationship between the writer and the readers. Williams (1985) states that coherence

. is a property ascribed to a discourse when the decoder judges that it successfully executes the encoder's intentions and that it meets the decoder's expectations of what the discourse should be, given his [sic] perception of the context, goals and intentions underlying the language event. (p. 474)

Crucial to an interactional theory of coherence is a pragmatic view of discourse predicated on Grice's (1975) Co-operative Principle -- that is, that the writer has a benign intention in writing and the reader intends to co-operate (also see Grundy, 1995; Hatch, 1992). Coherence is based on the writers' "intentionality" and the readers' "acceptance"' _ that is, text producers' and receivers' attitudes and assumptions play a significant part in determining whether a text is coherent. Coherence, therefore, is not dependent on the properties of the texts but on "the extent to which effort is required to construct a reasonable plan to attribute to the text producer in producing the text" (Green, 1996, p. 107). Gernsbacher and Givon (1995) maintain that "coherence" is a mental entity, which is a property of the mind that interprets the text rather than a property of the text. This view of coherence is supported by the Theory of Relevance proposed by Sperber and Wilson (1986), which is predicated on the assumption that the readers attempt to seek relevance in texts by comparing the information from texts to other information, thus creating new information or rejecting old information (Verschueren, 1999). Therefore, the reader can be regarded as an important contributor to "coherence." From a nonlinguistic perspective, "coherence'" can be said to be internal to the reader.

Therefore, coherence can be interpreted from two divergent sources linguistic and non-linguistic. Whether coherence is regarded as text-based or reader-based, it is important to note that the writer, the text, and the readers all interact in the construction of coherence.

# Operationalizing "coherence"

Since the classroom inquiry reported in this paper aimed to investigate the teaching of coherence, it is crucial to define "coherence" in more concrete terms so that students know exactly what to do when they attempt to achieve coherence in writing. As Grabe and Kaplan (1996) have argued, "defining the concept of coherence in some manageable way seems to be crucial to any understanding of how texts are constructed" (p. 76). Knowledge of coherence in writing is particularly important for ESL learners since the concept of coherence may be different in L1 writing. An operational definition of coherence which conceptualizes coherence in terms of a range of coherence-creating devices would help students manageably define coherence, since students need to know the linguistic resources available to help them create coherence in writing. Based on the literature review on the textual elements of coherence (see "Coherence as internal to the text'), coherence is operationally defined in terms of the following features:

1. Connectivity of the surface text evidenced by the presence of cohesive devices (Halliday & Hasan, 1976).   
2. An information structure which guides the reader in understanding the text and contributes to the topical development of the text (Connor & Farmer, 1990; Firbas, 1986; Lautamatti, 1987).   
3. Connectivity of the underlying content evidenced by relations between propositions and how these relations contribute to the overall discourse theme and organization (Kintsch & van Dijk, 1978).   
4. A macrostructure with a characteristic pattern or shape appropriate to its communicative purpose and context of situation (Hoey, 1983, 1991).   
5. Reader-based writing signalled by appropriate metadiscoursal features (Cheng & Steffensen, 1996; Crismore et al., 1993).

Such an operational definition also takes into account the reader's role in constructing coherence (i.e., coherence as internal to the reader), since the above coherence features are essentially reader-based features that sensitize the writers to the needs of the readers (i.e., how these features like macrostructure and cohesion can be employed to make the writing more explicit and more reader-friendly).

# The classroom inquiry

# The teaching of coherence

The teaching of coherence in this study was derived from the operational definition above (see words in boldface). The pedagogical focuses included (1) cohesion, (2) information distribution and topical development, (3) propositional development and modification, (4) macrostructure, and (5) metadiscourse. Since the readers play an important role in the construction of coherence, it was felt important to take into account reader-based factors like purpose, audience, and context (Lee, 1998). Therefore, another topic "Purpose, audience, and context of situation' was included to bring in a cognitive perspective of coherence. Also, the sequence of presenting the coherence topics was considered, and it was decided that the teaching should begin with the macro-elements (e.g., purpose, context, macrostructure) and then move on to the micro-elements of writing (e.g., cohesion and metadiscourse). In the study, the coherence topics were taught in the following sequence (see Lee, 1998 for further explanation of the topics):

1. Purpose, audience, and context of situation - i.e., how explicitness of purpose and awareness of audience and context contribute to coherence.   
2. Macrostructure - i.e., overall structure of texts.   
3. Information distribution and topical development - i.e., how information can be best organized (e.g., given-new) to contribute to overall topic development.   
4. Propositional development and modification - i.e., how propositions can be made more explicit by means of elaboration, illustration, exemplification, etc.   
5. Cohesion - i.e., reference, substitution, conjunctions, etc.   
6. Metadiscourse - i.e., certainty markers, topicalizers, announcements, attitude markers, etc.

Defining coherence as a list of features in the way it was done in this study is considered beneficial in at least two ways. First, with a list of coherence features, a text analysis approach can be used to teach coherence and to sensitize students to the coherence-creating devices used by writers in texts. Through text analysis, students can examine the uses of particular linguistic structures, transition devices, information structure, etc., and how these features function in the context of the entire text. Second, pedagogical materials to teach coherence can be based on problematic realizations of the coherence features, i.e., ("inadequate textualizations"; Coulthard, 1994, p. 2) to help students understand better the nature of successful textualizations (i.e., how coherence can be better achieved).

# Instructional context and procedure

The students who participated in the classroom inquiry were 16 first-year students at the Hong Kong Polytechnic University (HKPU). The teaching of coherence was incorporated into the English Communication Skills (ECS) course' in which they were enrolled. These 16 students belonged to the same ECS class taught by the teacher-researcher (the other two ECS classes were not taught by the teacher-researcher). The students, all aged between 18 and 23, speak Cantonese as their first language. When they entered the university, they had had about 16-17 years of exposure to English -- English as a subject in pre-school (for 3-4 years) and primary school (for 6 years), and English as a subject and/or as the medium of learning in the secondary school (for 7 years). Before their entry into university, all of them took the Use of English (UE) examination of the Hong Kong Advanced Supplementary Level Examination (HKASL) held by the Hong Kong Examinations Authority (HKEA). Research conducted by the HKEA has shown that a pass (i.e., Grade E) in the HKASL UE examination is approximately equivalent to a score of 515 on the internationally recognized Test of English as a Foreign Language (TOEFL) (see HKEA, 1993). Fourteen out of the sixteen students attained D or E in UE (E is the passing grade), and the majority (12) attained a Grade D for the writing component. It can, therefore, be concluded that this was a relatively homogenous group of students whose general English and writing proficiency were rather low. The teaching of coherence was based on a package of pedagogical materials designed around each of the six topics described above. The instruction, which lasted about 42 hour,2 was interspersed with other focuses on the ECS course (i.e., speaking, listening, reading, and study skills), which totaled 112 hour. There was a break after each coherence topic so that students could focus on other language skills such as speaking and listening. For each of the six coherence topics a similar instructional procedure was adopted, which consisted of four episodes:

1. Introduction to coherence topic: The students were introduced to the coherence topic by means of tasks involving them in discussion to stimulate their interest in the topic. Then explicit explanations on the topic were provided to prepare them for the subsequent tasks described below. For example, in "purpose, audience, and context of situation"' students were asked to read a text and discuss whether the text was coherent. From their discussion, issues relating to purpose, audience, and context of situation and how these could affect the coherence of writing were brought up and explained.   
2. Reading handouts about the coherence topic: Then students were given a set of handouts on the specific coherence topic to read in class. The purpose of the handout was to consolidate students' understanding of the topic taught. Also, unfamiliar metalinguistic terms were explained and illustrated with examples.

3. Coherence awareness-raising tasks: This formed the major part of the pedagogy. Students were engaged in a range of coherence awarenessraising tasks, essentially mini text analysis tasks, during which they applied the concept learnt. These tasks involved mainly reading and text analysis, and occasionally some follow-up writing or rewriting. For instance, a coherence awareness-raising task on the topic "cohesion"' might involve students in reading a text, analyzing the cohesive features, and revising the text so as to improve its cohesion. I played the role of facilitator and helper when students were working on these awareness-raising tasks.

4. Follow-up writing practice: This stage allowed students to apply the coherence concept learnt independently in their own writing. Students were given a topic on which to write or were asked to revise a previous draft, paying specific attention to the coherence topic(s) hitherto taught.

The above instructional steps were repeated for each coherence topic taught. All together, students wrote four essays. The number of essays and essay topics (see Appendix A) were prescribed by the course leader to make sure that all students in this study (three ECS classes) had the same written assignments. Since students were required to write on four topics and there were six instructional topics, it was decided that students would write 10 drafts (i.e., they revised two essays two times and the other two three times), so that the revision of a draft could be preceded by the input of a new topic (i.e., topic 1 taught before draft 2 of Essay 1; topic 2 before draft 2 of Essay 2; topic 3 before draft 3 of Essay 2; topic 4 before draft 2 of Essay 3; topic 5 before draft 2 of Essay 4; and topic 6 before draft 3 of Essay 4).

# Research questions

This classroom investigation sought to answer three research questions from the product, process, and student perception perspectives:

1. Did students' writing show improvement in coherence during the study?   
2. Did students display an awareness of coherence in their revision processes during the study?   
3. What were students' views of the teaching and learning of coherence and writing at the end of the study?

# Methods of data collection and analysis

In this study, three sources of data were used to answer the research questions regarding the teaching of coherence:

1. Product data -- students' pre- and post-revision texts collected during the study.   
2. Process data - students' think-aloud protocols when they were revising their texts during the study.   
3. Perception data - students' evaluation questionnaires and interviews at the end of the study.

While all 16 students completed the pre- and post-revision tasks as a requirement of the ECS course, the protocols were not made compulsory for the students. This was mainly a decision based on the result of the pilot study that preceded this classroom investigation, which aimed to try out some pedagogical materials and research instruments designed for the study. One significant finding that emerged from the pilot study was that students resisted the idea of think-aloud protocols, since each time they were required to perform think-aloud protocols, a number of students skipped classes to avoid the procedure. Therefore, it was felt that inviting volunteers to perform the protocol outside class time would be in students' best interest. Unlike traditional research, in teacher research, pragmatism may sometimes be necessary to maintain "a fit between teacher needs and student needs in the research process" (Baumann, Bisplinghoff, & Allen, 1997, p. 136). Due to attrition, complete protocol data was collected from only four students who volunteered to perform the protocols (in total seven students volunteered). Pseudonyms are used when referring to these four students; they are Alfred, Berta, Carly, and Thomas. In the study, in-depth analysis was carried out using data collected from these four students.

# Product data

The first and final drafts produced by Alfred, Berta, Carly, and Thomas were selected for in-depth data analysis. Two kinds of data analysis were applied to the drafts. First, "topical structure analysis" was used to find out if students improved the coherence of their writing between drafts. There is research evidence to show that topical structure is a useful indicator of coherence in writing and that more coherent texts tend to rely less on sequential progressions and more on parallel progressions (see Connor & Farmer, 1990; Witte, 1983a, 1983b). An independent reader read a random selection of each of the students' texts and identified the sentence topics of the texts, and these sentence topics were compared with my own analyses. Perfect agreement was reached $78 \%$ of the time, and the differences were resolved in conference. Second, three independent raters, all experienced ESL teachers, read the pre- and post-revision drafts and compared them blindly for overall coherence, using the Coherence Scoring Guide I developed and piloted together with the raters. The raters were asked to indicate which draft was better in terms of overall coherence. For essays where three drafts were produced, it was decided that only the first and final drafts would be used in order to get quick, impressionistic feedback from the raters as to which draft was more coherent, taking into account factors like time and fatigue if three drafts were used. The data collected from these raters was triangulated with the text analysis data based on the same drafts (i.e., first and final).

# Protocol data

The six protocols (one for Essay 1, two for Essay 2, one for Essay 3, and two for Essay 4) produced by each of the four students while they were revising (i.e., a total of 24) were translated (where Cantonese was used), transcribed, and coded. The coding scheme contains 14 categories, which include the coherence topics covered in the lessons, as well as others which arose from the data (see Table 1). The data was coded according to the major concern expressed by the students, either an explicitly expressed concern (e.g., Just a moment. New information comes first, after old information -- concern with information distribution) or an implicit concern observed from the student's remark (e.g., Then leave out "people get divorce." In its place, use "they" instead - concern with "cohesion''). An independent reader coded a random selection of each of the students' protocols, and $90 \%$ agreement was reached. Differences were discussed and resolved with the independent reader. Table 1 summarizes the 14 categories of concerns expressed by students, giving examples extracted from the protocol data to illustrate the meaning of each category.

Table 1 Concerns (with examples) expressed during students' think-aloud protocols   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Coherence-related concerns</td><td>Examples extracted from protocols</td></tr><tr><td>Purpose</td><td>This sentence does not seem to be useful because there&#x27;s no need to introduce myself. State the purpose of writing this letter clearly.</td></tr><tr><td>Main idea</td><td>The theme - This is the first time I&#x27;m writing to you and maybe you do now know who I am. But I am writing to tell you something about my ideal university life.</td></tr><tr><td>Audience</td><td>How can I shorten the distance between myself and the reader?</td></tr><tr><td>Context of situation.</td><td>I want to put in something that would make it sound like an article you see from a woman magazine. What would that be?</td></tr><tr><td>Macrostructure</td><td>This should be put at the front . .. following teenage marriage. Let me change the order; the second paragraph should be about reluctant parenthood, and the third unemployment.</td></tr><tr><td>Information distribution</td><td>Just a moment. New information comes later, after old information.</td></tr><tr><td>Propositions</td><td>The length of the book is short. How short? You need to support your statement.</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion</td><td>Then leave out &quot;people get divorce.&quot; In its place, use &quot;they&quot; instead.</td></tr><tr><td>Metadiscourse</td><td>Furthermore, first to put a rhetorical question, eliciting the reader&#x27;s own views.</td></tr><tr><td>Content</td><td>The second paragraph talks about why I recommend this book, and it&#x27;s because of vocabulary.</td></tr><tr><td>Language use</td><td>I think an ideal university life should include several aspects. Use &quot;aspects,&quot; or &quot;include several things&quot;  which is better? OK.</td></tr><tr><td>Syntax</td><td>Use &quot;aspects.&quot;. Combine two sentences into one.</td></tr><tr><td>Mechanics</td><td>According to Confucianism - C-o-n-f-u-c-i-a-n-i-s-m. .</td></tr><tr><td>Length (paragraph or essay)</td><td>As my essay is about 400 words, I think I have to delete a lot to</td></tr></table></body></html>

# Perception data

All 16 students completed an evaluation questionnaire (see Appendix B) at the end of the study. The questionnaire served the overall purpose of evaluating the teaching of coherence in the course. In order to obtain as much truthful data as possible, students flled out the questionnaires anonymously. For the purpose of this study, only the data from questions 4 and 5 were used. A group interview (see Appendix C for interview guide) was also conducted with the four students selected for in-depth analysis to find out their views about the teaching and learning of coherence and writing. The aim was to provide additional information about the four students selected for indepth analysis and to shed light on "student perceptions"' in the study. The interview was semi-structured and conducted in a mixture of Cantonese and English. The Cantonese data was translated into English. In this paper, the interview data regarding students' difficulties in applying the coherence principles learnt (i.e., question 3 in the interview guide - see Appendix C) is presented.

# Results and discussion

This section reports and discusses the findings, and, where appropriate, the data is supported by samples of students' writing.

Product data: students' pre- and post-revision texts

Table 2 presents the results of topical structure analysis, comparing the sentences per sentence topic of the pre- and post-revision drafts written by the four students. The results show that in 12 out of 16 texts (i.e., $7 5 \%$ ), the final drafts contain more sentences per sentence topic than the first drafts - the average is $2 1 . 3 \%$ . On average, the pre-revision drafts contain 2.67 sentences per sentence topic, while the post-revision drafts have 3.29 sentences per sentence topic. The results therefore suggest that in post-revision texts, students elaborated on the sentence topics more than the pre-revision texts and, thus, were more likely to produce coherent writing. Students also relied less heavily on sequential progressions, and, as a result, they were likely to produce writing which had a clearer topical focus and, hence, was more coherent (see Witte, 1983a, 1983b). The following example shows Carly's effort at elaboration of the sentence topic in her revised draft on the topic of "divorce"' in Essay 2 (sentence topics are underlined):

Table 2 Comparing sentences per sentence topic in pre- and post-revision drafts   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Essay 1</td><td colspan="2">Essay 2</td><td colspan="2">Essay 3</td><td colspan="2">Essay 4</td></tr><tr><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D1</td><td>D3</td><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D1</td><td>D3</td></tr><tr><td>Alfred</td><td>2.14</td><td>2.14</td><td>3.5</td><td>3.8 (+8%)</td><td>2.75</td><td>5.25 (+48%)</td><td>2.4</td><td>3.17 (+24%)</td></tr><tr><td>Berta</td><td>2.8</td><td>3.0 (+7%)</td><td>4.14</td><td>6.2 (+33%)</td><td>2.71</td><td>3.29 (+18%)</td><td>4</td><td>4</td></tr><tr><td>Carly</td><td>1.77 (+12%)</td><td>1.55</td><td>2.75</td><td>3.18 (+12%)</td><td>2.23</td><td>2.33 (+13%)</td><td>2.3</td><td>2.44 (+6%)</td></tr><tr><td>Thomas</td><td>1.78</td><td>2.30 (+23%)</td><td>2.0</td><td>2.0</td><td>3.0</td><td>4.5 (+33%)</td><td>2.38</td><td>3.5 (+52%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

D1:draft 1D2:draft 2D3:draft 3.

# Revised draft

Original draft   
It is disheartening to find that the divorce rate in   
Hong Kong is rising   
dramatically. This situation can't be blamed on only one factor.

It is disheartening to find that the divorce rate in Hong Kong is rising dramatically. This is typically a phenomenon of the changing view towards divorce. It is mainly caused by the rise of women status and the easy divorce process.

Table 3 presents the results of the independent readers' judgments of the preand post-revision drafts, which can be used to triangulate with the topical structure analysis data. The percentages of agreement among the three readers are in parentheses. The results suggest that in 14 out of 16 essays (i.e., $8 7 . 5 \%$ , students improved the overall coherence after revisions. When juxtaposed with the data gathered from topical structure analysis (see Table 2), the results consistently show that students improved in coherence in the same post-revision drafts, except in two essays which have the same number of sentences per sentence topic (Thomas's Essay 2 and Berta's Essay 4 - see Table 2).

Below are the first three paragraphs of Alfred's drafts of Essay 4 (see Appendix D for full drafts) to illustrate his improvement in terms of coherence criteria such as information distribution, use of cohesive devices (e.g., connectives and pronouns), explicitness of propositions, etc. In this essay students were

Table 3 Independent readers' coherence judgments of pre- and post-revision drafts   

<html><body><table><tr><td rowspan="2"></td><td colspan="2">Essay 1</td><td colspan="2">Essay 2</td><td colspan="2">Essay 3</td><td colspan="2">Essay 4</td></tr><tr><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D1</td><td>D3</td><td>D1</td><td>D2</td><td>D1</td><td>D3</td></tr><tr><td>Alfred</td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Berta</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Carly</td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td></tr><tr><td>Thomas</td><td></td><td>Better (66.7%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td><td></td><td>Better (100%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

D1: draft 1; D2: draft 2; D3: draft 3.

asked to write a letter to the local newspaper to express their views of the fur industry.   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Alfred&#x27;s pre-revision draft.</td><td>Alfred&#x27;s post-revision draft</td></tr><tr><td>(1) I want to give my response towards those animal rights groups who regard fur trade as a cruel and inhumane trade. (2) They commonly argue that killing animals for fur is brutal. Animal rights are disregarded. Animals have the right to live just as the same as human beings. Their opinions sound</td><td>(1) It is commonly believed that fur trade is cruel and inhumane. However, I cannot be convinced because the arguments of animal rights groups are invalid for me. (2) Those groups indicate that killing animals for fur is brutal which not concerns animal rights. Animals have the right to live just as the same as human beings. Those opinions sound</td></tr><tr><td>(3) Killing, regardless of human beings or animals, are no doubt savage. So, we can&#x27;t only concern those animals making fur. Those group should stop eating meat and go to protest against killing of cattle such as cow, pig and sheep. They all have their right to live, not to be killed. Why killing these livestock is humane while killing Others for fur is not?.</td><td>standard for all animals? (3) Killing, no matter which species of animal are, is no doubt savage. Those groups should not only oppose killing of animals for making fur but also for eating such as cows, pigs and sheep. Why do they oppose killing animals selectively?</td></tr></table></body></html>

In his post-revision draft, Alfred improved the opening by re-arranging the information about fur trade being cruel and inhumane, putting it at the very beginning to serve as background information for the topic, which asked students to express their views of the fur industry. Then he stated his stance on the issue categorically, using the connective However to link the first two sentences. In the second paragraph of the post-revision draft, Alfred used Those groups to replace They, which renders the reference clearer. The rhetorical question in the second paragraph of the post-revision draft, compared with that of the pre-revision draft, conveys the idea of the writer more clearly: Those opinions sound nice but do they hold the same standard for all animals? The question do they hold the same standard for all animals? improves the vagueness in is it the true story? in the prerevision draft. It shows that Alfred was able to make the original proposition more explicit for the readers. Interestingly, while Alfred tended to lengthen the propositions in the first two paragraphs to make explicit his purpose of writing and to elaborate on ideas (which might give the impression that the post-revision draft is more difficult to read), in the third paragraph, he condensed the information in the pre-revision draft to make his ideas more direct and relevant to the topic. In the first sentence of the third paragraph, for example, he deleted the idea of killing human beings as it is not relevant to the following example about killing cows, pigs, and sheep. In the third paragraph of the pre-revision draft, Alfred digressed from killing in sentence 1 to concern for animals in sentence 2, and then to eating in sentence 3. In his post-revision draft, however, he developed the sentence topic of killing in the first sentence by attacking the double standard of the animal rights groups in his second sentence: Those groups should not only oppose killing of animals for making fur but also for eating such as cows, pigs and sheep. He continued with the idea of killing in the last sentence: Why do they oppose killing animals selectively? Overall the third paragraph in the post-revision draft is clearer than that in the prerevision draft, and hence more coherent. The full drafts in Appendix D will show that other attempts at revisions in Alfred's post-revision draft have rendered the essay more coherent than the pre-revision draft.

Overall, the results gathered from topical structure analysis and the independent readers seem to indicate improvement in coherence at the end of instruction. Hence, the answer to the first research question posed earlier, whether students improved the coherence of their writing during the study, is affirmative.

Process data: students' protocols

A total of 425 concerns were expressed in the six protocols produced by the four students, of which 167 concerns $( 3 9 . 3 \% )$ were about coherence. Although the data does not indicate a gradual increase in the percentage of coherence-related concerns from the first to the last protocol, the findings do suggest that coherence was a significant concern throughout the students' revision processes (the percentages of coherence-related concerns ranging from 23.5 to $4 6 . 5 \%$ ). Results in Table 4 consistently indicate that students showed increased awareness of a particular facet of coherence after instruction. For example, 11 concerns out of 33 coherence concerns (i.e., $3 3 . 3 \%$ were expressed about "macrostructure" after instruction, but there was no concern about "macrostructure"' before instruction. This could be because "macrostructure" was an unfamiliar concept to students before instruction. The same can be said for "information distribution," which was one of the students' coherence concerns after instruction. The percentages before and after instruction for "propositional development and modification' are $3 4 . 4 \%$ (11 out of 32) and $50 \%$ (8 out of 16), respectively; for "cohesion"' $12 . 5 \%$ (2 out of 16) and $4 7 . 4 \%$ (18 out of 38), respectively; and for "metadiscourse"' $7 . 9 \%$ (3 out of 38) and $1 1 . 1 \%$ (2 out of 18), respectively. On the whole, the data suggests that instruction could have a direct effect on students' revision processes.

Table 4 Students' coherence concerns during think-aloud protocols   

<html><body><table><tr><td>Coherence topics</td><td>Before instruction</td><td>After instruction</td></tr><tr><td>Purpose, audience, and context of situation</td><td>NA (not measured)</td><td>14 out of 30 (46.7%)</td></tr><tr><td>Macrostructure</td><td>3 out of 30 (10%)</td><td>11 out of 33 (33.3%)</td></tr><tr><td>Information distribution</td><td>0 out of 33 (0%)</td><td>11 out of 32 (34.4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Propositional development and modification</td><td>11 out of 32 (34.4%)</td><td>8 out of 16 (50%)</td></tr><tr><td>Cohesion</td><td>2 out of 16 (12.5%)</td><td>18 out of 38 (47.4%)</td></tr><tr><td>Metadiscourse</td><td>3 out of 38 (7.9%)</td><td>2 out of 18 (11.1%)</td></tr></table></body></html>

In the previous section on product data, Alfred's drafts were used to illustrate the improvement in coherence. Below is some protocol data from the same student to supplement the product data, which illustrates his concerns with coherence while revising the same essay (i.e., Essay 4 on fur industry). In revising the introductory paragraph, in his think-aloud, Alfred said,

Oops! Am I digressing? How could I have not noticed it earlier? Your views of the fur industry [reading from essay topic] ... totally off target! What should I do? My views of the fur industry - don't know what do. What am I supposed to do? Obviously, I am digressing as it is, definitely off the mark, right from the introduction. How about going like this: I can't be convinced ... animal rights groups ... they can't convince me that fur trade is a cruel trade. I think a lot of people are cruel themselves, but ... I can't be convinced. Anything else? They commonly believed ... commonly believed that fur trade ... is cruel. However ... what contrasts what here? Not everyone believes that. Take me. I can't be convinced that it is so, because ... I find ... because ... the argument ... the argument from those animal rights groups ... invalid for me. The argument .. the argument of animal right groups ... are invalid for me.

When revising the introduction of the draft, Alfred realised that he had not paid sufficient attention to the key words in the essay topic (i.e., your views about the fur industry), which would probably be a criterion for measuring coherence. In his pre-revision draft, he began with I want to give my response towards those animal right groups who regard fur trade as a cruel and inhumane trade; the focus is put on animal right groups. During revision, he realised that the emphasis in the statement of purpose was misplaced, and so he revised it substantially by giving some background information about the subject of fur industry and then stating his stance explicitly. When he was reading the second paragraph, he said:

They commonly argue that killing animals for fur is brutal - animal rights are disregarded. They have the right to live just . . . they .. . they have the right . .. used they to refer to animal rights groups? Better use animal rights groups. Do it later.

The protocol data shows that Alfred was concerned with the use of cohesion to link ideas between the first two paragraphs. In the final draft, Alfred in fact changed animal right groups to those groups and used it to begin the second paragraph. Nonetheless, it was an improvement over "they" as the reference is clearer. Later, he said:

Their opinions sound nice ... but is it the true story? Is it true? They say it isn't fair, but often hold a double standard. Let me see. Their opinions are basically good, but do they hold the same standard for all animals? Yes, do they hold the same standard for all animals? Done.

Alfred was examining the proposition is it the true story and was thinking aloud to elaborate on it. He thought of the "double standard" of animal rights groups and so modified the proposition to do they hold the same standard for all animals? The revised proposition pinpoints the double standard Alfred expressed in his protocol, which supplements and complements the product data presented earlier.

When he came to the third paragraph, Alfred revised his opening proposition to make it more relevant to the topic. In his protocol, he said, Killing, regardless of human beings or animals, are no doubt savage. I'll say apart from those killed for fur, there are other animals killed for some things we need. Don't mention human beings - leave it out completely. Alfred realized that he should be referring to the killing of animals, not humans, and so he decided to delete human beings from the original sentence, thus modifying the original proposition. Alfred was aware of the need to be relevant by deleting redundancies in the next sentence in the same paragraph: So we can't only concern those animals making fur. This is a redundancy. ... It's redundant. In another place in the same paragraph, Alfred said, They all have their right to live, not to be killed. This is a tautology. Redundant. The previous sentence says more or less the same thing. Alfred was also concerned with the importance of maintaining the topical focus of the paragraph: Those group should stop eating meat and go to protest against killing of cattle such as cow, pig and sheep. No, don't say it like this -- they don't really have to make a protest. In the post-revision draft, he dropped the idea of stop eating meat and protest against killing of cattle and came up with a neater sentence with killing animals as his topical focus: Those groups should not only oppose killing of animals for making fur but also for eating such as cows, pigs and sheep. Alfred's protocol data suggests that he paid close attention to the topical focus when he was revising the third paragraph.

Overall, the protocol data suggests that students showed awareness of different aspects of coherence during revision. To answer the second research question about whether students displayed an awareness of coherence in their revision processes, the findings suggest that, during the study, students were concerned with coherence during revision, and they tended to pay attention to the aspects of coherence taught prior to revisions.

Perception data: students' questionnaires and interview

In response to the question, What do you know now about "effective writing"4 compared with when you first started the course? students' responses suggest that they have broadened their awareness of what "good writing" entails. "Good writing,' at the end of the study, is described in terms of organization (by one student), reader-friendliness (by three students), coherence (by five students), multi-facetedness (by two students), etc. One student wrote in the response, for example, Started the course -- write a essay without grammatical problems. Now also include the coherence of the essay. Another student remarked, Before taking the course, I believed that effective writing must be supported by many things, such as a wide range of vocabulary, hard sentence structure. ... Now, I learn that there are many fundamental knowledge to be improved in order to write a good essay. The protocol data does indicate students paid attention not only to grammar but also to different aspects of coherence, such as clarity of purpose and linkage between propositions. Also, some students felt that they had learnt more concrete ideas about how they could go about their writing: There is a much more clearer picture to show me that what's "effective writing." At the very beginning, I just don't know the way to improve my writing. I don't know what's needed to improved, although I knew I had to. Thus, it is plausible that the teaching of coherence has broadened students' views of "good writing." One caveat, however, is that some students seemed to think that good writing is equivalent to incorporating the six coherence features taught in the study. For instance, one student wrote, I think good or effective writing should have the six topics which this term learn. Another remarked similarly, Effective writing should include all the topics I learnt in the course. If this teaching of coherence were to be done again, methods would need to be found to steer students away from such a limited and potentially limiting view of writing. Another caveat is that students might have given positive remarks to please the teacher, despite the fact that they did not have to disclose their names on the questionnaires.

In response to the question, Have the lessons on coherence helped you write better? In what ways? Explain, six students answered that the lessons on coherence helped them write better (e.g., I think I can write better than before). These students possibly felt empowered by the explicit teaching of coherence. Eleven students said that their awareness of various aspects of writing had been raised as a result of the teaching. For example, one student remarked on the use of "connectives": I now use every word with a higher awareness. I won't use connective to fill the gap of my mind and I won't say something without support. Another student wrote, I am more aware of what I am writing. Similarly, Alfred's protocol data suggests that during revision he was aware of the importance of maintaining the topical focus, taking out irrelevancies, and elaborating on propositions in writing. One student pointed out specifically that the instruction provided students with more "options": I think the topics provide us with more options and choices for us to do better in our writing. Leki (1996) believes that some ESL students feel that "their only sense of security comes from what they have learned about grammar' (p. 34). In his study of ESL students' perceptions of L1 and L2 writing, Silva (1992) quotes one Chinese student's perception about L2 writing: \*It seems that the grammar is the only tool that I can use in writing English essays" (p. 34). However, in this study, at least some students felt that they could focus on other things in writing, such as "metadiscourse" and "information distribution.' This was, to some extent, confirmed in the protocol data. On the whole, the results may suggest that the lessons on coherence have succeeded, to some extent, in providing students with strategies for writing in addition to "grammar. This result is encouraging, especially because research has indicated that, in writing, ESL students focus almost exclusively on the word and sentence levels rather than the level of the whole discourse (Bamberg, 1984; Ferris & Hedgecock, 1998). Nonetheless, at the end of the study, some students might still focus a great deal on the accuracy of writing, as seen from the following comment: After the lessons, I know how to limit mistake in writing. Another student stated, I'll put more emphasis on proofreading my text. One student thought that the lessons were not very useful in effecting a change: But I stillfind that it is difficult to write a text to fulfill these elements of coherence. Only one other student seemed to agree: Frankly, not very much, for it's hard to change my style. Most of the time, I simply pick up my pen and write, thinking little of whether it is coherent or not.

To find out why the application of coherence principles might be difficult for students, in the group interview, Alfred, Berta, Carly, and Thomas were asked to talk about the difficulties they encountered in applying the coherence principles taught. The findings show that Berta and Carly did not find the principles difficult to apply. Alfred said that he tried to apply them, but sometimes he could not decide what to use. Thomas confessed that he did not always apply the principles because he focused mainly on grammar. Both Thomas and Berta said that "language proficiency" was a factor which influenced the application of the coherence principles. They felt hamstrung by a weak command of grammar and vocabulary in attempting to create coherence in writing. Carly thought that some coherence topics were difficult to apply (e.g., metadiscourse). She also pointed out "text type"' and "essay topic"' as possible factors which might affect the application of the coherence principles taught (i.e., when the text type and essay topic were less familiar, such as the magazine article and topic on the fur industry). The teacher-researcher felt that some of the students' points were valid. Since the pedagogical focus of the ECS course was on speaking, listening, reading, and study skills as well as coherence, not much time was left specifically for grammar and vocabulary in the lessons. This may explain why Thomas and Berta felt that their attempts to create coherence were hampered by their weak command of language. In the study, the coherence features were presented as generalized principles not linked to specific text types and topics. For example, students were asked to write a personal letter, a magazine article, a book review, and a letter to the newspaper editor. However, the coherence lessons were not tied in with the requirements of these different text types, and, in particular, the emphasis was not on how the coherence elements function in these genres. It would have been more useful if students were shown how coherence would function differently in different genres rather than learn it as some generalized principles. To answer the final research question about what students thought about the teaching and learning of coherence and writing, students seemed to have broadened their understanding of writing and felt that the teaching of coherence had equipped them with various resources to go about their writing.

# Limitations

A number of limitations of the study have to be noted. First, the coherence lessons had their own shortcomings. Due to the heavy academic focus, students, at times, found the lessons boring and overwhelming because they expected something less academic from an English Communications Skills class. It was unfortunate that a more appropriate site, such as a writing program specifically designed for upgrading students' writing proficiency, could not be found for the purpose of the study. Second, in the study the essay topics were not directly related to the input in the lessons, so students might have difficulty applying the principles to specific text types. Further, students engaged in peer reviews during the revision process without getting a great deal of input from the teacher. However, it seems that students probably need more teacher feedback to help them revise their drafts to improve their coherence. Finally, in a single case study like this classroom inquiry (and in the absence of a control group), the findings cannot be generalized, but are specific to the particular group of students and to the specific context described in the study.

# Suggestions for further research

In this study, coherence was taught to a group of university students in a Hong Kong university where English is learnt as a second/foreign language. Future research could investigate the effects of teaching coherence in other contexts, especially with students of different levels of language proficiency. An experimental or quasi-experimental study could be conducted to find out whether any causal relationship between coherence instruction and students' writing can be identified. Second, it would be interesting to find out how teaching coherence could be geared toward different text types instead of being presented as generalized principles, so that students could be provided with specific help to understand how coherence conventions vary with different genres. Third, given the importance of grammar in writing as well as the students' felt need to work on grammar, the relationship between the teaching of coherence and grammar provides another interesting area for future research. It would be useful to find out how grammar can be exploited in the teaching of coherence to enhance the effectiveness of writing instruction, instead of focusing on "coherence" exclusively, as in this study. Finally, to shed light on why "coherence" continues to be a difficult concept for ESL students, it would be worthwhile to conduct in-depth case studies to find out what actually occurs in the minds of the writers as they employ coherence-creating mechanisms in writing (e.g., the factors that govern their choice of coherence features, the difficulties they encounter, and how they perceive "coherence" while writing). Further research could be carried out to explore coherence as a property of the mind of the writers through think-aloud protocols and post-writing conferences.

# Conclusion

This classroom inquiry began with a quest for a better understanding of coherence, which was operationalized in terms of a number of coherence-creating features. Coherence was then taught based on these features, and as a result of the findings gathered from the study, insights were gained to help the teacherresearcher re-examine coherence as a pedagogical concept. Indeed, the classroom research has demonstrated that coherence need not be a fuzzy and elusive concept; it can be understood, taught, learnt, and practiced in the classroom.

# Appendix A. Essay topics

1. Write an anonymous letter to a classmate telling him or her about your "ideal university life." Your letter will be randomly given to a classmate who will read it and try to find out who you are. Begin your letter with "Dear classmate," and sign it with "A classmate of yours." (The students wrote the letter in the first week of the course.)   
2. Write an article for a local women's magazine on the title "Divorce in Hong Kong." (The students wrote the article after a series of integrated skills lessons on the topic of dating and marriage.)   
3. Read a novel during term break and write a review. Say whether you would recommend the book to a friend or not, and why (The students wrote the book review during term break.)   
4. Write a letter to the South China Morning Post expressing your views about the fur industry. (The students wrote the letter after they had watched a video about the fur industry and had some discussion about the topic afterwards.)

# Appendix B. Post-study evaluation questionnaire

In the course, you have learnt about six topics relating to coherence:

Purpose, audience, and context of situation.   
Macrostructure.   
Information distribution and topical development. Propositional development and modification.   
Cohesion.   
Metadiscourse.

Try to reflect on what you have learnt and answer the following questions. You don't have to write your name.

1. Rank the six topics in terms of their usefulness by putting 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and   
6 in the blanks provided (1 being the most useful and 6 the least useful).

Purpose, audience and context of situation   
Macrostructure   
Information distribution and topical development   
Propositional development and modification   
Cohesion   
Metadiscourse   
2. Explain why the one you selected as "1" is the most useful.   
3. Explain why the one you selected as $\ " 6 \ "$ is the least useful.   
4. What do you know now about "effective writing" compared with when you first started the course?   
5. Have the lessons on "coherence"' helped you write better? In what ways? Explain.

# Appendix C. Interview guide

The interview guide consists of the following:

What are students' views of the role of language accuracy and coherence in writing?   
What do students think of the metalinguistic terms used in the coherence lessons?   
What difficulties, if any, did students encounter in attempting to create coherence in writing?   
What do students think of their own writing (overall quality, coherence, etc.)?

# Appendix D. Alfred's pre- and post-revision drafts of Essay 4

Topic: Write a letter to the Editor of the South China Morning Post expressing your views of the fur industry. (300 words)

# D.1. Pre-revision draft

I want to give my response towards those animal rights groups who regard fur trade as a cruel and inhumane trade.

They commonly argue that killing animals for fur is brutal. Animal rights are disregarded. Animals have the right to live just as the same as human beings. Their opinions sound nice but is it the true story?

Killing, regardless of human beings or animals, are no doubt savage. So, we can't only concern those animals making fur. Those group should stop eating meat and go to protest against killing of cattle such as cow, pig and sheep. They all have their right to live, not to be killed. Why killing these livestock is humane while killing others for fur is not?

Considering animal rights again, have you set up a cage to catch mouse? Why mouse should be caught and others should not? What I query is which species are animal which have right? Why some animals can be killed and some are not?

The only answer I can get is a double standard. Those animal rights group kill animals on one hand and blame the others do so. Ha! Ha! What a big joke.

I suppose one day, the fur production will be regarded as necessity, not luxury if all can afford these fur clothes. Meats from cow, sheep and pig are cheap enough for all to buy and eat. Everyone do the same and it regards as necessity. However, this is untrue since those dietitians and vegetarians are all alive. When everyone can afford fur, no one will oppose to it because everyone do the same and so there's nothing wrong. The reasons why people oppose to it is that still few people can afford this. When everyone can afford this, fur will be just the same as cotton.

I hope those animal rights group should make a more reasonable argument to urge for the ban of the fur trade.

# D.2. Post-revision draft

It is commonly believed that the fur trade is cruel and inhumane. However, I cannot be convinced because the arguments of animal right groups are invalid for me.

Those groups indicate that killing animals for fur is brutal which not concerns animal rights. Animals have the right to live just as the same as human beings. Those opinions sound nice but do they hold the same standard for all animals?

Killing, no matter which species of animal are, is no doubt savage. Those groups should not only oppose killing of animals for making fur but also for eating such as cows, pigs and sheep. Why do they oppose killing animals selectively?

What's more, have the people of those groups eaten any meat from cows, pigs and sheep? Why should these animals be killed for eating while the animals for making fur should not? Are those groups living by a double standard? Those groups show their opposition towards the fur industry which kills certain species of animal but keep silent when others kill other species. Therefore, can this argument, protecting animal rights, be justified?

One will still argue that killing animals for fur is a luxury while animals for eating is a necessity. So, the industry should be stopped. However, since dietitians and vegetarians who do not eat animals are all alive, meat from animals are a necessity. It is a luxury instead. Thus, this logic is also invalid.

I hope those so called animal right groups should make a more sensitive and reasonable argument to urge for the banning of the fur trade.

# References

Bain, A. (1890). English composition and rhetoric. London: Longmans, Green.   
Bamberg, B. (1983). What makes a text coherent? College Composition and Communication, 34(4) 417-429.   
Bamberg, B. (1984). Assessing coherence: A reanalysis of essays written for the National Assessment of Education Progress. Research in the Teaching of English, 18(3), 305-319.   
Baumann, J. F., Bisplinghoff, B. S., & Allen, J. (1997). Methodology in teacher research: Three cases. In J. Flood, S. B. Heath, & D. Lapp (Eds.), Handbook for research on teaching literacy through the communicative and visual arts (pp. 121-143). New York: Prentice Hall.   
de Beaugrande, R., & Dressler, W. (1981). Introduction to text linguistics. London: Longman.   
Britton, B., & Gulgoz, S. (1991). Using Kintsch's computational model to improve instructional text: Effects of repairing inference calls on recall and cognitive structures. Journal of Educational Pyschology, 83, 329-345.   
Brown, G., & Yule, Y. (1983). Discourse analysis. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Carrell, P. L. (1988). Interactive text processing: Implications for ESL/second language reading classrooms. In P. Carrell, J. Devine, & D. Eskey (Eds.), Interactive approaches to second language reading (pp. 239-259). New York: Cambridge University Press.   
Cerniglia, C. S., Medsker, K. L., & Connor, U. (1990). Improving coherence by using computerassisted instruction. In U. Connor & A. M. Johns (Eds.), Coherence in writing: Research and pedagogical perspectives (pp. 227-241). Alexandria, VA: Teaching of English to Speakers of Other Languages.   
Cheng, X., & Steffensen, M. S. (1996). Metadiscourse: A technique for improving student writing. Research in the Teaching of English, 30(2), 149-181.   
Connor, U. (1990). Linguistic/rhetorical measures for international persuasive student writing. Research in the Teaching of English, 24(1), 67-87.   
Connor, U., & Farmer, F. (1990). The teaching of topical structure analysis as a revision strategy for ESL writers. In B. Kroll (Ed.), Second language writing: Research insights for the classroom (pp. 126-139). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Coulthard, M. (Ed.). (1994). Advances in written text analysis. London: Routledge.   
Crismore, A., Markkanen, R., & Steffensen, M. S. (1993). Metadiscourse in persuasive writing: A study of texts written by American and Finnish university students. Written Communication, 10, 39-71.   
Danes, F. (1974). Functional Sentence Perspective and the organisation of text. In F. Danes (Ed.), Papers on Functional Sentence Perspective (pp. 106-128). The Hague: Mouton.   
Dehn, N., & Schank, R. (1982). Artificial and human intelligence. In R. J. Sternberg (Ed.), Handbook of human intelligence (pp. 352-386). Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Ferris, D., & Hedgecock, J. S. (1998). Teaching ESL composition: Purpose, process and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Firbas, J. (1986). On the dynamics of written communication in light of the theory of Functional Sentence Perspective. In C. Cooper & S. Greenbaum (Eds.), Studying writing: Linguistic approaches (pp. 40-71). Beverly Hills, CA: Sage.   
Garnham, A. (1985). Pyscholinguistics: Central topics. London: Arnold.   
Gernsbacher, M. A., & Givon, T. (1995). Coherence in spontaneous text. Amsterdam: Benjamins.   
Grabe, W., & Kaplan, R. B. (1996). Theory and practice of writing. London: Longman.   
Green, G. M. (1996). Pragmatics and natural language understanding. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Grice, H. P. (1975). Logic and conversation. In P. Cole & J. Morgan (Eds.), Syntax and semantics, 3: Speech acts (pp. 41-58). New York: Academic Press.   
Grundy, P. (1995). Doing pragmatics. London: Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1985). An introduction to functional grammar. London: Arnold.   
Halliday, M. A. K. (1994). The construction of knowledge and value in the grammar of scientific discourse, with reference to Charles Darwin's The origin of species. In M. Coulthard (Ed.), Advances in written text analysis (pp. 136-156). London: Routledge.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1976). Cohesion in English. London: Longman.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1985). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a socialsemiotic perspective. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Halliday, M. A. K., & Hasan, R. (1989). Language, context, and text: Aspects of language in a socialsemiotic perspective. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Hatch, E. (1992). Discourse and language education. Cambridge, London: Cambridge University Press.   
Hatim, B., & Mason, I. (1990). Discourse and the translator. London: Longman.   
Hoey, M. (1983). On the surface of discourse. London: Allen and Unwin.   
Hoey, M. (1991). Patterns of lexis in text. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press.   
Hong Kong Examinations Authority (HKEA). (1993). Public examinations in Hong Kong. Hong Kong: HKEA.   
Hymes, D. (1972). On communicative competence. In J. Pride & A. Holmes (Eds.), Sociolinguistics (pp. 269-293). Harmsworth, Canada: Penguin.   
Kintsch, W., & van Dijk, T. A. (1978). Toward a model of text comprehension and production. Psychological Review, 85, 363-394.   
Langan, J. (1996). College writing skills. New York: McGraw-Hill.   
Lautamatti, L. (1987). Observations on the development of the topic of simplified discourse. In U. Connor & R. B. Kaplan (Eds.), Writing across languages: Analysis of L2 text (pp. 87-114). Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley.   
Lee, I. (1998). Enhancing ESL students' awareness of coherence-creating mechanisms in writing. TESL Canada Journal, 15(2), 36-49.   
Leki, I. (1996). L2 composing: Strategies and perceptions. In B. Leeds (Ed.), Writing in a second language: Insights from first and second language teaching and research (pp. 27-36). White Plains, NY: Longman.   
McCarthy, M. (2001). Issues in applied linguistics. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Oakhill, J., & Garnham, A. (1988). Becoming a skilled reader. Oxford, England: Blackwell.   
Oshima, A., & Hogue A. (1991). Writing academic English: A writing and sentence structure handbook. White Plains, NY: Longman.   
Richards, J. (1990). The language teaching matrix. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press.   
Roberts, R. M., & Kreuz, R. J. (1993). Nonstandard discourse and its coherence. Discourse Processes, 16, 451-464.   
Scardamalia, M., & Bereiter, C. (1986). Research on written composition. In C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed., pp. 778-803). New York: Macmillan.   
Silva, T. (1992). L1 vs. L2 writing: ESL graduate students' perceptions. TESL Canada, 10, 27-47.   
Singer, M. (1990). Psychology of language: An introduction to sentence and discourse processes. Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum.   
Smagorinsky, P., & Smith, M. W. (1998). Editors' introduction: Announcing the Alan C. Purves Award: On the impact of educational research. Research in the Teaching of English, 39, 5-9.   
Sperber, D., & Wilson, D. (1986). Relevance. Oxford, England: Blackwell.   
Vande Kopple, W. J. (1983). Something old, something new: Functional Sentence Perspective. Research in the Teaching of English, 17, 85-99.   
Vande Kopple, W. J. (1986). Given and new information and some aspects of the structures, semantics, and pragmatics of written texts. In C. Cooper & S. Greenbaum (Eds.), Studying writing: Linguistic approaches (pp. 72-111). London: Sage.   
Verschueren, J. (1999). Understanding pragmatics. London: Arnold.   
Williams, J. D. (1985). Coherence and cognitive style. Written Communication, 2, 473-491.   
Witte, S. P. (1983a). Topical structure and revision: An exploratory study. College Composition and Communication, 34, 313-341.   
Witte, S. P. (1983b). Topical structure and writing quality: Some possible text-based explanations of readers' judgments of student writing. Visible Language, XVII, 177-205.