# BALEAP news e April for May 2021

March and April 2021 have been very busy months for BALEAP with a Professional Issues Meeting (PIM) hosted by Northumbria University, the Annual General Meeting, and the biennial conference, hosted on this occasion by the University of Glasgow.

The Northumbria PIM’s title was ‘Integration’ a theme which drew in a wide range of topics of interest and concern to EAP practitioners from intercultural communication (the focus of the plenary given by Helen Spencer-Oatey) to inclusivity, to the EGAP/ESAP dichotomy, EMI and EAP and the integration of the global north and south. This was an event that had had to be postponed from the previous March, but was well worth the wait. Slides and any recordings will be become available on the BALEAP website in the next few weeks.

The AGM took place during the biennial conference e our first fully online conference and the longest to date, being spread over a full five days. As usual at the AGM the elections of officers and ordinary members to the committee were confirmed. The past couple of years have seen a significant number of changes to the committee and at this meeting, we said farewell to John Slaght, our departing Testing Officer, Kerry Tavakoli, our Events Officer, and Steven Herron, our Research and Publications Officer. John had served the full two terms of office and over this period led on the development of the BALEAP Testing Guidelines (available in the Resources section of the website https://www.baleap.org/resources/baleap-publications) and the testing roadshows which have been a significant feature of the last few years. Kerry had also made a substantial contribution to the work of the committee leading the events organisation over what has been a very difficult final year of her office. The new officers coming into these roles are Fiona Orel, as Testing Officer and Fiona Wallace, as Events Officer. Steven Herron resigned from the Research and Publications role after a year due to other commitments and this role will now be held by Susie Cowley-Haselden and Laetitia Monbec who will be sharing this role as a UK and an overseas representative. Other officers to be confirmed in their roles were Paul Hendrie as TEAP Officer, Anneli Williams as SIGs Officer, Natasha Ingall and Anna Murawska, as Ordinary Members, Conrad Heyns as Incoming Chair, and Lia Blaj-ward as the newly elected BALEAP Accreditation Scheme (BAS) Chair.

In addition to the formalities of the meeting, the AGM is also an opportunity to reflect on the successes of the past year and future actions. As Chair, I am particularly proud of the successes of the Special Interest Groups (SIGs) which only came into being as the UK went into lockdown a year ago. Although one or two of the groups had to be paused, others have been extremely active. Nine SIGs have been approved to date and over the course of the year around 30 webinars were held, plus a dozen other events (workshops, symposia, a world cafe, an international conference, coffee mornings, etc.). Membership varies from 16 (the minimum) to c.350 with an average of 90 per SIG and the move to online meetings and events has meant that these groups are much more accessible to overseas members. Much credit must go to Anneli Williams as the SIGs Officer for all the work she has put in to support the SIG committees and manage the development of the scheme. More information about the SIGs can be found on the website (https://www.baleap.org/projects) and the BALEAP news will be featuring the work of the SIGs in more detail in future issues.

There have been a number of other highlights over the course of the year one being the establishment of a TEAP scholarship and additionally the growing interest in the TEAP scheme and the amount of activity in this area. The TEAP Officer, Paul Hendrie, has introduced a series of online cross-institutional events, and revision of the mentoring system and reviewing of the criteria and the handbook are all underway. Further information on the TEAP scheme can be found on the website (https://www.baleap.org/accreditation/individuals) including a TEAP pathway quiz to identify which level of fellowship to apply for (https://www.baleap.org/accreditation/individuals/teap-pathway-quiz).

Behind the scenes, other members of the committee have also been working hard on a range of different initiatives. The Information and Publicity Officer, Lisa Hanson, has led on work to articulate BALEAP’s values more clearly as an organisation, plus leading on our social media and marketing strategy and contributing to a newly formed membership working group along with the Treasurer, the Ordinary Members and other officers of the committee. The smooth running of the organisation is founded on the effectiveness of this back room work and we have been very fortunate to be able to draw on the expertise of the Treasurer (Bella Reichard) and the Web Officer (Ania Rolinska). The committee has benefited greatly too from the injection of energy, enthusiasm and innovative thinking of our two new Ordinary Members, Natasha Ingall and Anna Murawska.

The final highlight of these last two months must, of course, be the BALEAP biennial conference. This was an enormous feat of organisation and was a huge success. The theme was Exploring Pedagogical Approaches In EAP Teaching and the hosting team at Glasgow put together a rich and varied programme. The conference was wholly online with a mix of pre-recorded papers with live discussion slots, live papers and plenaries, SIG events, publisher sessions, a forum for further discussions and a great social programme. More than 700 participants attended from 52 different countries creating a real buzz at the conference and a great audience dynamic. Our next conference will take place in 2023 and we are looking forward to receiving proposals to host this. The venue will be announced in May. In the meantime, the BALEAP membership can also look forward to another first, the joint CEAPA-BALEAP conference on EAP as a Glocal Language which will be taking place on 28e30 May 2021 at Xi’an Jiaotong-Liverpool University in China. Further information can be found here: https://www.xjtlu.edu.cn/en/conference/ ceapa-baleap-2021-conference.