Universities should disclose data on waste recycling
We refer to the letter, “Collect deeper waste data to promote recycling” (December 30), and wish to echo your correspondents’ call for mandatory data collection on waste at the neighbourhood level. As students at Baptist University, we also urge the government to require all publicly funded tertiary institutions to disclose data about waste recycling.
There are more than 1,700 student residents living in the Baptist University dormitory. It is not clear how well the residential community has performed in recycling waste on campus. In the dormitory buildings, recycling bins are provided on each floor. Yet, based on our observations, few students are using them to recycle waste.

In response to our inquiry, the university said it started recording waste recycling data in September last year but could only share the information for academic research. It also said the data should not be made public.

As university dorms will be included in the upcoming waste charging scheme, the Environmental Protection Department should require all publicly funded universities to report the waste recycling performance of dorm residents. Comparison and competition among different institutions will incentivise university administrators to creatively promote recycling in residential communities.

Shuxiao Wang and Sharon Tan, Kowloon Tong

https://www.scmp.com/comment/letters/article/3209710/adani-groups-troubles-are-warning-against-investment-fossil-fuels

Collect deeper waste data to promote recycling
In the Blueprint for Sustainable Use of Resources 2013-2022, the Environment Bureau strived to reduce the per capita municipal solid waste disposal rate to 0.8kg in 2022. Yet, in 2020, the rate stood at 1.44kg. In the Waste Blueprint for 2035 published last year, the government set a new target, of reducing disposal by 40 to 45 per cent through the waste charging scheme.
To better understand recycling at neighbourhood level, we conducted a case study of a private residential community in Tai Po, with about 5,700 residents. In a year, this community’s recycled waste amounted to 1,207kg of plastics, 4,313kg of paper, 1,579kg of glass, and 428kg of metal. While the total amount of solid waste generated is not available, we estimated the recovery rates to be 0.29 per cent (plastics), 0.9 per cent (paper), 4.55 per cent (glass), and 0.99 per cent (metal), based on the per capita domestic waste generated by Hong Kong residents. The recovery rates were much lower than the city averages.

To increase the overall waste recovery rates in Hong Kong, the government must pressure the property managers of such communities to promote recycling more aggressively.

Admittedly, our calculations are by no means precise, as the demographic composition of the neighbourhood is unlikely to be the same as that of the city. Our difficulty in reaching more accurate figures underscores the need to directly collect waste management data at neighbourhood level.

The Environmental Protection Department should make it compulsory for all private residential communities and public housing estates to collect and publicise solid waste data such as the total amounts of waste generated, recycled or sent to landfills. To promote recycling in Hong Kong, residential communities could be ranked according to more accurate recycling rates, with their respective property management recognised or held to account accordingly.

Dora Yau and Ashley Figuera, Kowloon Tong

https://www.scmp.com/comment/letters/article/3204971/hong-kong-housing-paradox-why-temporary-flats-cost-more-build?module=inline&pgtype=article