*Dear Hong Kong Observatory staff,*

*I am writing to request info about the chatbot Dr Tin. Please kindly
answer the following quesions under the Code on Access to Information.*

*1) Please provide the tendering documents for developing the chatbot.*

**Please refer to the attached
document(chatbotquotation.pdf).**![](Projects and teams/hko_chatbot/media/media/image1.emf)

*2) Could you explain why Dr Tin is only available in Cantonese but not
in formal written Chinese? Considering the fact that all HK residents
can understand formal written Chinese but not all can understand written
Cantonese, please provide the reasoning behind the decision to make Dr
Tin available in written Cantonese only.*

**Referring to the item 2.2 (i) under section 2 Scope of the
specification of the quotation (page 22), English, Traditional and
Simplified Chinese, i.e. written Chinese, and mixed languages of these
three languages including Cantonese are stated as requirement. Written
Chinese and Cantonese are both supported.**

*3) Please provide a list of questions that Dr Tin can handle and the
predetermined answers.*

**The list of topics that chatbot Dr Tin designed to handle are provided
in the greeting message. They are:**

(i) **Local current weather and weather forecast, e.g. temperature,
    relative humidity, wind direction and speed, rainfall condition,
    etc.**

(ii) **Local weather warning in force**

(iii) **UV index and visibility report**

(iv) **Local tidal information**

(v) **Hong Kong standard time and sunrise/sunset times**

(vi) **Hong Kong climate**

(vii) **World cities weather and sunrise/sunset times**

**A Chatbot employs an AI engine to predict meaning of user's question.
As there are many variants of question with the same meaning, the
chatbot will first analyse user's question and map to an intent that was
designed to handle topic(s) of user's questions. A list of intents with
questions that the chatbot can handle, and predetermined answers (refer
to the following paragraph for details), in Cantonese, written Chinese,
and English, is attached for reference.**

![](Projects and teams/hko_chatbot/media/media/image2.emf)

**Meanwhile, the answers provided by chatbot Dr Tin are dynamic in
nature because the answers are dependent on a number of variables such
as location, date, time, etc., in the question. Thus, the predetermined
answers were prepared by fitting real-time data at the time when the
list was prepared. In addition, the name of real-time datasets used for
compiling the answer in a paragraph of the original content (e.g. Local
Weather Forecast) or graphics format (e.g. 9-day Forecast, Automatic
Weather Forecast, World Weather Information Services, etc.) is marked
inside square bracket \[ \] in the answer.**

*4) In what ways does Dr Tin learn to answer new questions that his
database/ knowledge cannot handle?*

**Those questions that the chatbot cannot answer would be examined by
HKO staff periodically, and the chatbot may be re-trained to answer
those questions subject to available resources.**

*5) In what ways does Dr Tin\'s knowledge base connect with HKO\'s open
data https://www.hko.gov.hk/en/abouthko/opendata_intro.htm*

**Answers from the chatbot Dr. Tin are same as those in the open data.
For instance, if asking chatbot Dr. Tin the coming weather forecast, the
answer would be the 9-day forecast which can be found in [9-day weather
forecast of
data.gov.hk](https://data.gov.hk/en-data/dataset/hk-hko-rss-9-day-weather-forecast).**

*6) It seems rather straight-forward to deploy Dr Tin via the HKO
website as well. Please explain why Dr Tin is only available via
MyObservatory app.*

**The chatbot is also accessible at the lower right corner of the**
[**homepage**](https://www.hko.gov.hk/en/index.html) **of the HKO
website. Please refer to the attached screen capture.**

![](Projects and teams/hko_chatbot/media/media/image3.png){width="6.264583333333333in"
height="3.890277777777778in"}

*7) Please provide the usage data of Dr Tin chatbot via the app, e.g.
no. of users per month and no. of questions answered per day. To provide
the context for this question, please also provide the no. of downloads
and no. of acive monthly users of the app.*

**The number of questions answered per day via the MyObservatory app was
about 2,300 in the past 12 months. As login is not required to use the
chatbot or app, the number of users using the chatbot via the app is not
available. The total number of downloads of the MyObservatory is about
9.2M up to April 2022. According to the information on the App Store and
Google Play Store, the monthly active users were about 0.33M and 1.5M
respectively.**

*8) It seems that Dr Tin is not just a chatbot. He also engages in
educational activities, e.g.
https://kids.weather.gov.hk/en/ebook_shelf.html Please provide more info
about HKO\'s overall plan for Dr Tin.*

**"Dr Tin" is the mascot of the Hong Kong Observatory (HKO). In addition
to the chatbot function of the mobile application MyObservatory, Dr Tin
is also utilised in various public education materials on HKO's website,
social media platforms (including Facebook, Instagram, YouTube), TV
Announcement in the Public Interest (API) as well as HKO's open day to
promulgate weather, climate and other relevant knowledge. Looking ahead,
HKO will continue to use Dr Tin for public education with a view to
raise public awareness of weather and climate issues, and promote
understanding of HKO's services.**

*9) Assuming that Dr Tin is part of the larger digital transformation
strategy of HKO, could you refer me to documents and reports about how
the department plans to offer better digital services for the public
adopting the state-of-the-art technologies?*

**The development of chatbot Dr. Tin aligns with the long-term
objectives of the HKO. You may refer to the Observatory's [5-year
strategic plan](https://www.hko.gov.hk/en/abouthko/yearplan.htm) for
further information.**

*Thanks in advance for your assistance.*

*Yours sincerely*

*Dr Simon Wang, Ph.D., FHEA*

*Lecturer in English*

*Language Centre*
