Local Environment The International Journal of Justice and
Sustainability

ISSN: 1354-9839 (Print) 1469-6711 (Online) Journal homepage:
www.tandfonline.com/journals/cloe20

Revealing hidden energy poverty in Hong Kong: a multi-dimensional
framework for examining and understanding energy poverty

Annie On-ni Yip, Daphne Ngar-yin Mah & Lachlan B. Barber

To cite this article: Annie On-ni Yip, Daphne Ngar-yin Mah & Lachlan B.
Barber (2020) Revealing hidden energy poverty in Hong Kong: a
multi-dimensional framework for examining and understanding energy
poverty, Local Environment, 25:7, 473-491, DOI:
10.1080/13549839.2020.1778661

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2020.1778661

Published online: 17 Jun 2020.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 1216

View related articles

View Crossmark data

Citing articles: 23 View citing articles

Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=cloe20

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT 2020, VOL. 25, NO. 7, 473--491
https://doi.org/10.1080/13549839.2020.1778661

Revealing hidden energy poverty in Hong Kong: a multi-dimensional
framework for examining and understanding energy poverty

Annie On-ni Yip, Daphne Ngar-yin Mah and Lachlan B. Barber

Department of Geography, Asian Energy Studies Centre, Hong Kong Baptist
University, Kowloon Tong, Hong Kong

ARTICLE HISTORY Received 1 March 2019 Accepted 31 May 2020

KEYWORDS Energy poverty; non- economic indicators; households' lived
experiences; multi- dimensional framework

three main ﬁndings are presented. First,

ABSTRACT Energy poverty and other social aspects of energy are an
important but under-researched area in the sustainability literature.
This article challenges the eﬀectiveness of the traditional
expenditure-based 10%- income indicator in reﬂecting the nature and
complexity of energy poverty, with particular reference to a case study
in Hong Kong. To advance the energy poverty literature, this study
proposes a multi- dimensional framework to conceptualise the complex
linkages between vulnerability factors, impacts, and responses of
energy-poor households. Based on analysis of ﬁve in-depth household case
studies and 14 semi- structured interviews, the proposed integrated
framework reveals that households in the Hong Kong context exposed to
multiple vulnerability factors adopted various the traditional responses
expenditure-based indicator is not eﬀective in identifying energy poor
households. Most of the interviewed households did not reach the 10%
income expenditure line but their lived experience suggests that they
are energy poor. Household under-consumption of energy as a survival
mechanism to cope with energy poverty vulnerabilities is a critical into
"hidden" energy poverty. process through which households fall Thirdly,
household responses to energy poverty impacted health, learning
environment, family relationships, and dignity. These ﬁndings suggest
that future policy responses to energy poverty should pay more lived
attention to non-economic indicators, experiences.

to energy poverty challenges. Second,

in particular households'

1.  Introduction

In the context of accelerating energy-related crises, calls for
sustainable energy transitions are mount- ing, with energy security,
climate change and energy poverty representing three major challenges
(González-Eguino 2015). However, little attention has been given to
framing urban dimensions of energy transitions, including energy
poverty, alongside questions of justice. Although energy is an
indispensable resource for social development and daily life, some
households which cannot access suﬃcient energy to provide convenience
and comfort for their livelihoods are characterised as "energy poor".
Research on "fuel poverty" was initiated in the UK by Boardman (1991)
and later extensive work on this topic and more broadly conceptualised
"energy poverty" has been undertaken in Northern developed countries
(Bouzarovski, Petrova, and Tirado-Herrero 2014; Day, Walker, and In
Asia, by contrast, the issue of Simcock 2016; Healy and Clinch 2002;
Sovacool et al. 2012).

CONTACT Daphne Ngar-yin Mah Kong Baptist University, 12/F, Academic and
Administration Building, 15 Baptist University Road, Kowloon Tong, Hong
Kong © 2020 Informa UK Limited, trading as Taylor & Francis Group

Department of Geography, Asian Energy Studies Centre, Hong

daphnemah@hkbu.edu.hk

474

A. O. YIP ET AL.

energy poverty is not well understood. Pioneering research was
undertaken by Okushima (2016) and the WGO (2012), a Hong Kong-based NGO,
but many questions remain unanswered. The geographical focus on Asia is
important because regional diﬀerences such as climate and urban
development matter in explaining the pace of change, scale and outcomes
of energy poverty. In contrast to existing Euro- pean-centric,
heating-themed literature, Asian cities are characterised by the
presence of high-rise build- ings and hot weather. The Hong Kong case
study presented here addresses this gap in the literature. Our
investigation began from an enquiry on the eﬀectiveness of an
expenditure-based indicator to identify energy poor households. In Hong
Kong, WGO (2012) adopt the 10% indicator, one of the most commonly
adopted measurements in Europe, to estimate the extent of energy
poverty. The average energy expenditure of a Hong Kong household
accounts for less than 5% of its income (Chu and Schroeder 2010). In
part because electricity costs are seen as immaterial (Chu and Schroeder
2010), the Hong Kong government has not introduced any oﬃcial deﬁnitions
or indicators for energy poverty. The existing energy policies in Hong
Kong emphasise the importance of reliability, aﬀord- impacts in the
city's energy management ability, safety, and minimisation of
environmental system (Environment Bureau 2014), making no explicit
government intervention on energy poverty. This paper therefore aims (i)
to examine the limitations of existing expenditure-based methods for
measuring energy poverty in Hong Kong, and (ii) to propose and explore
an alternative multi-dimen- sional framework. The research identiﬁes
vulnerability factors and indicators of households attempt- ing to
regulate and reduce their consumption of electricity, liqueﬁed petroleum
gas, and water, as well as the impact of their responses on well-being.
Potential policy responses are also considered. The remainder of the
paper is structured as follows. Section 2 provides a review of relevant
theor- etical perspectives. An alternative, multi-dimensional framework
is then introduced. Section 3 pro- vides an overview of the study
methodology. Section 4 discusses the case context of Hong Kong. Section
5 presents the main ﬁndings. The ﬁnal section oﬀers some concluding
thoughts and policy recommendations.

2.  Theoretical perspectives of energy poverty

2.1. Energy poverty and just transitions

Social aspects of energy transitions are an important but sometimes
overlooked area in the sustain- ability literature. The transformation
of energy systems, along with other large socio-technical systems
including transport and telecommunications, requires not only
technological advancement, but also a co-evolution of social, cultural,
and institutional changes which collectively shape energy regimes (Kemp,
Parto, and Gibson 2005). The dynamics between vulnerable groups and
traditional key stakeholders in energy regimes are not well studied.

The notion of just transitions is an emerging theme in energy studies.
Three transition pathways have been proposed: the direction of change,
the diversity of ways forward, and distributional con- sequences
(Stirling 2009). This latter theme focuses on the uneven distribution of
costs and beneﬁts in energy transitions (Cludius 2015; Fullerton 2011;
Rübbelke and Vögele 2011). Diﬀerent kinds of dis- tributional
consequences can be perceived as unjust. For example, climate change
impacts, cross- subsidisation issues of renewable subsidies, and higher
prices of energy (Ingrao et al. 2018).

Energy justice studies are concerned with distributional, procedural and
recognition justice (McCau- ley et al. 2013). Willand and Horne (2018)
analyse a retroﬁt intervention trial in Melbourne, Australia and reveal
lived experiences of energy vulnerabilities and distributional and
procedural injustice. Their study highlights the need for energy
policies that acknowledge and address social diﬀeren- tiation among
households. Bouzarovski and Simcock (2017) examine the contribution of
spatial dis- parities in household incomes and energy prices to the
emergence of geographically uneven energy injustices at diﬀerent scales.

Interest in energy poverty stems from a recognition of uneven access to
aﬀordable energy, which is a question of justice. In spite of growing
usage, there is a lack of an agreed deﬁnition of this concept

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

475

(Gouveia, Seixas, and Long 2018; Okushima 2016). Various existing
deﬁnitions portray two contrasting energy poverty situations: excess or
insuﬃcient spending on energy (Rademaekers et al. 2016). A common
condition underpinning energy and fuel poverty in developed and
developing countries can be summarised as "the inability to attain a
socially and materially necessitated level of domestic energy services"
(Bouzarovski and Petrova 2015).

Another theme of energy poverty studies sheds light on the importance of
comfort conditions to energy poverty. Day, Walker, and Simcock (2016)
argue that energy demand is about more than basic survival needs,
suggesting it is also closely linked to valued human capabilities. For
example, being in good health requires energy services to provide often
more than minimal thermal comfort and a hygienic environment. Energy
poverty therefore may reﬂect the inability of certain households to
obtain the energy services which are essential to a "decent" and
"healthy" life (Middlemiss and Gillard 2015).

2.2. Measuring energy poverty: alternative approaches and their
limitations

Research has measured energy poverty using two main approaches. The ﬁrst
is an expenditure-based approach which is based upon the proportion of
household income spent on domestic energy. Speciﬁc methods include the
Minimum Income Standard (MIS) (Miniaci, Scarpa and Valbonesi 2014), the
10% indicator (Boardman 1991), and the Low-Income High Cost (LIHC)
indicator (Hills 2011). The second is a consensual-based approach which
is based upon household self-assessments of warmth and perceived basic
necessities (Healy 2004; Healy and Clinch 2002; Petrova et al. 2013;
Thomson and Snell 2013). More recent research by Herrero (2017) and
Rademaekers et al. (2016) speciﬁes four ways to measure energy poverty:
(1) The 10% indicator which aims to detect households with an excessive
energy expenditure relative to income; (2) The MIS and LIHC which
determine a household as energy poor when residual income after
above-median energy expenditure falls below the income poverty line; (3)
consensual-based indicators which qualify the household as energy poor
if it cannot meet a decent level of energy consumption such as warmth;
(4) hidden energy poverty (HEP) indicators that track households with
abnormally low actual energy consumption.

Using a single indicator has limitations: some have argued that the
expenditure-based approach may overestimate the disposable income of
households (Baker 2011; Hills 2011; Snell, Bevan, and Thomson 2015) and
underestimate their energy needs (Snell, Bevan, and Thomson 2014, 2015).
The consensual-based approach, on the other hand, is often criticised
for lacking objectivity because it is based on household perceptions
(Dubois 2012; Palmer, MacInnes, and Kenway 2008). In general, energy
poverty tends to be deﬁned by macro-level indicators as opposed to a
richer picture of the lived experience uncovered in qualitative work.
Alternatives focusing on qualitative analysis have been proposed,
including the capabilities framework (Day, Walker, and Simcock 2016) and
the energy vulnerability framework (Bouzarovski, Petrova, and
Tirado-Herrero 2014; Mid- dlemiss and Gillard 2015). In the latter
energy poverty can be encapsulated in six factors and indi- cators (see
Table 1) which highlight pathways and risks of a household's propensity
to energy poverty (Bouzarovski and Petrova 2015; Bouzarovski, Petrova,
and Tirado-Herrero 2014; Thomson, Bouzarovski, and Snell 2017).

Thus far, three gaps can be identiﬁed in the literature: (a) the
relationships between household lived experience and energy poverty; (b)
factors shaping energy poverty in relatively aﬄuent countries or cities
with subtropical climates, such as Hong Kong; and (c) the mechanism of
factors inﬂuencing energy poverty. An integrated multi-dimensional
framework and potential policy responses are proposed to address these
gaps.

2.3. Towards an integrated multi-dimensional framework

Based on the literature on energy poverty, fuel poverty, and
non-measurement based approaches (Boardman 2010; Day, Walker, and
Simcock 2016; Middlemiss and Gillard 2015; Thomson,

476

A. O. YIP ET AL.

Table 1. Key factors and indicators of energy vulnerability framework
(adapted from Thomson, Bouzarovski, and Snell 2017).

Factors Aﬀordability

Accessibility

Flexibility

Energy

Eﬃciency

Driving forces

Selected indicators

. High ratio between cost of energy and

household incomes Inability to invest in the construction of new energy
infrastructures

. Detailed household income .

Energy costs (information on payment methods and tariﬀs) Self-perceived
aﬀordability ratio or burden of energy services in home

.

. Non-payment and arrears on energy bills

Poor availability of energy carriers

. Choice and availability of energy carriers

Inability to move to a form of energy service provision

. Householder ﬂexibility to move on new energy services .

Tenure type

.

.

.

. Disproportionately high loss of useful energy

.

.

.

Technical energy eﬃciency and housing quality The adequacy of the built
fabric of dwellings and equipment contained

Socio-demographic questions, including household size and type

. Health and well-being condition

Energy Needs

. Mismatch between household energy

requirements and available energy services Potential additional energy
needs

.

Household Practices

. Ways in which households may have rationed their provision of domestic
energy services

. Information on their daily usage of appliances . Knowledge about
local/regional/national support

schemes, and if the households has previously taken up any schemes

Bouzarovski, and Snell 2017), we develop an integrated framework to
better conceptualise energy poverty. Our framework has three
inter-related building blocks: (i) vulnerability factors and indicators,
(ii) responses, and (iii) impacts. As shown in Figure 1, vulnerability
factors can be grouped into two concentric circles: in the inner circle
are the three key factors contributing to energy poverty, i.e. low
income, high energy cost and poor housing quality (Boardman 2010); in
the outer circle are

Figure 1. The integrated multi-dimensional framework of energy poverty.

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

477

six key vulnerability indicators of energy poverty: aﬀordability,
accessibility, ﬂexibility, energy eﬃciency, energy needs, and household
practices (Thomson, Bouzarovski, and Snell 2017). The inward-pointing
arrows stress that the three factors can aﬀect energy poverty. The
vulnerability factors and the associated indicators can be used to
create an evaluative framework to identify households who are more
vulnerable to energy poverty. The second building block relates to
house- hold responses to perceived vulnerability to energy poverty. This
framework suggests that house- holds often adjust three forms of energy
use -- electricity, liqueﬁed petroleum gas, and water -- in order to
address energy poverty challenges (Brunner, Spitzer, and Christanell
2012; Middlemiss and Gillard 2015; Mould and Baker 2017; Willand,
Maller, and Ridley 2017). The third building block relates to impacts on
households as they respond to their perceived vulnerability to energy
poverty. Responses may impact well-being in terms of health, education,
relationships, and dignity (Chard and Walker 2016; Day, Walker, and
Simcock 2016; Mould and Baker 2017).

This paper makes the key assumptions that approaches that focus on
expenditure-based indi- cators have a blind spot in that they (1) are
unable to detect the existence of energy poverty or to specify the
factors and the associated mechanisms in inﬂuencing energy poverty, (2)
do not capture compensatory behaviours adopted to keep expenditures low,
and (3) fail to examine the households' comfort conditions created
through energy consumption, which may mislead or delay the attention of
policy-makers.

3.  Methodology

This study adopts a qualitative case-study method to provide a better
understanding of the com- plexity and multi-dimensionality of energy
poverty. The study has three main sources of qualitat- ive data: desktop
research, face-to-face interviews and ﬁeld visits. A desktop scan of
published data on energy poverty and housing issues drew on a range of
sources, including academic work, government sources and the mainstream
media. Fourteen semi-structured in-depth inter- views were conducted in
March 2018 with members of major stakeholder groups, including ﬁve
households (see Table 2), three social workers, two academics, three
environmental NGOs and one representative from a utility company. This
research indicates interviewees by code. "H" represents "household", "E"
represents "environmental group", "S" represents "social services
group", "C" represents "corporate", and "A" represents "academia".
Face-to-face interviews were conducted with three households referred by
Caritas Hong Kong (To Kwa Wan Service Station, Kowloon), while two were
approached during a visit in which the lead author accompanied a

Table 2. An overview of ﬁve case studies of interviewed households.

Interviewed households

Nationality

Household composition

Household monthly income (Average)

Type of dwelling

Living area (per capita)

Rental price (monthly)

H1

H2

H3

H4

H5

Mainland China Mainland China Hong Kong

Pakistan

Type of member

Adult

Child

Adult

Child

Adult

Child

Adult

Child

Hong Kong

Adult

Child

Number 2 2 2 2 2 3

2 5

2 2

HK\$ 16,000

HK\$ 15,000

Subdivided

unit

Subdivided

unit

≈ 50 sq. ft.

HK\$ 6,700

≈ 50 sq. ft.

HK\$ 4,000

HK\$ 8,680 (S)

Subdivided

60 sq. ft.

HK\$ 6,300

unit

- HK$10,425 (A)
  HK$ 5,000 (S)
- HK$13,145 (A)
  HK$ 18,000

Rooftop unit

43 sq. ft.

HK\$ 5,800

Subdivided

20 sq. ft.

HK\$ 4,500

unit

- "S" is "Salary"; "A" is "Allowance from CSSA".

478

A. O. YIP ET AL.

social worker from HKSKH Lady MacLehose Centre in Kwai Chung, New
Territories on a site visit. We selected these ﬁve households because of
the social worker referrals and because their living conditions in
poor-quality housing, as deﬁned by overcrowding and the physical setting
(dis- Interviews were transcribed cussed below), exposed them to greater
risk of energy poverty. and are used below to develop household-level
case study narratives. Quotes from interviewees are included verbatim
and italicised.

The size of the sample is conﬁned to a small number of households in
part because of diﬃculties in recruitment. During the site visits, some
households were reluctant to participate when asked. The social worker
explained that households are often concerned about the privacy of their
daily life within the home, especially in these illegally subdivided
units. In view of this, four face-to-face and six telephone interviews
with social workers and other stakeholders were conducted between March
and August 2018 to complement the household interviews. The study does
not aim to produce ﬁndings that are representative but rather
indicative.

Transcripts were translated from Cantonese to English and systematically
analysed by applying a grounded theory approach (Charmaz 2006). Based on
pragmatism and symbolic interactionism, this study distils recurring
themes into concepts and explores the role of contextual and structural
factors in creating the observed conditions. While pragmatism pays
attention to the function of research results, symbolic interactionism
advocates entering the social context to study the research partici-
pants' interpretations of their life worlds (Corbin and Strauss 1990).
By combining these approaches, this study incorporates accounts of
households' lived experience and deciphers their relationship with the
social issue of energy poverty.

4.  Case context: energy poverty in Hong Kong

This section "zooms out" to see the background of energy poverty in Hong
Kong by highlighting some important local contextual features. Hong Kong
is an international metropolis with a population of 7.4 million and a
GDP of 341.4 US billion (HKTDC 2018). However, the disparity between the
rich and the poor is extreme. In terms of wealth inequality, Hong Kong's
Gini coeﬃcient is 0.851, ranking second among developed economies behind
the United States (Global Wealth Report 2017, 2017). Energy poverty
still can be found in a well-developed city like Hong Kong where over
200,000 house- holds are estimated to live below the energy poverty line
(Tam 2012; WGO 2012). However, the nature of energy poverty in Hong Kong
is noticeably diﬀerent from developed countries in Europe owing to its
climate, energy system, and housing market.

4.1. Energy needs for cooling in a hot climate

Studies on energy poverty were initiated in the UK and extended to other
countries with similar climates, mainly in northern latitudes where
space heating to maintain thermal comfort in cold winters is a major
source of energy needs. Energy poverty has gained attention in these
countries in part because of the threat of death posed by inadequate
heating in cold winter weather. In Hong Kong, by contrast, space cooling
is a major source of energy needs. In May 2018, a Very Hot Weather
Warning was in eﬀect continuously for 348 h, breaking records since the
launch of the warning in 2000 (Hong Kong Observatory 2018b). Hot summer
nights could potentially be more fatal than daytime extreme heat (Kao
2017). The number of hot nights (nights when the minimum temperature is
28 degrees or above) steadily increased from 12 days in 1997 to 41 days
in 2017 (Hong Kong Observatory 2018a). It is estimated to reach 55 per
year by 2020 (Lee 2010). The increase in these extreme weather
conditions has a greater impact on the energy poor. Although there are
not many cases of heat-related deaths in Hong Kong compared to foreign
cold-induced winter deaths, quality of life can be seriously impacted by
the lack of indoor cooling.

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

479

4.2. Transforming energy system and rising energy costs

Hong Kong has a reliable and highly regulated energy system supporting a
relatively aﬀordable energy supply. The market is geographically
monopolised by two privately-owned companies, namely China Light & Power
Company (CLP) and Hongkong Electric Company (HEC) (Mah, Hills, and Tao
2014). Since the 1960s, Scheme of Control agreements (SCAs) have been
signed between the Hong Kong government and the two power utilities. The
SCAs regulate tariﬀ adjustments to ensure a stable supply and reasonable
price, and to guarantee rates of return which tend to reinforce the two
companies' monopolies (Mah et al. 2012, 2018). However, the close
linkage between guar- anteed rates of return and ﬁxed asset investment
discourage power companies from promoting energy eﬃciency (Interviewee
E11 and E12). In addition to the limited scale and inert development of
demand side management, population growth, economic growth, lifestyle
changes and the expansion of the service sectors all contribute to the
rise in energy consumption (Mah et al. 2012, 2018). Relatively low
consumer electricity tariﬀs lead to a low consciousness of energy saving
in general (Mah et al. 2012, 2018). Overall, the residential electricity
prices in Hong Kong are cheaper than other global cities, such as
Singapore, London, New York and Sydney (Environment Bureau 2014).

Aﬀordability of electricity expenses has, however, become an issue of
public concern in Hong Kong. The government has set an ambitious carbon
intensity target of 65% to 70% by 2030 using 2005 as the base year (ENB
2017a). The higher proportion of natural gas in the power generation
fuel mix (27% versus 48% for coal and 25% for non-fossil fuels), the
retirement of old power plant coal-ﬁred generating units from 2017, and
the construction of additional power plants may drive up the cost of
energy (ENB 2017b). The Consumer Council (2015) has expressed concern
that this energy transition plan would disproportionately aﬀect
low-income energy consumers with impli- cations for energy poverty which
deviates from the goal of sustainability.

About 90% of electricity in Hong Kong is consumed by buildings, among
which commercial build- ings account for 65% while residential
consumption accounts for 27% (EMSD 2018). It is conceivable that low
income households account for a minority of electricity consumption.
Yet, they are likely to share the environmental costs of other large
end-users. We argue that it is unjust for them to further compress their
energy demand, especially when their own economic capabilities and
housing fea- tures hinder the improvement of domestic energy eﬃciency.

4.3. Housing market and substandard accommodations

Housing quality is one of the key determinants of energy poverty
(Boardman 1991). In Hong Kong, skyrocketing property values and a
shortage of aﬀordable housing force some residents to live in illegal
subdivided rental units, including the extreme cases of "cage" or "coﬃn"
dwellings,1 and poorly constructed accommodations, including on
rooftops. Although receiving attention as a con- temporary problem,
substandard accommodations are not new. In the 1940s squatter
settlements built of scrap wood and corrugated iron sprawled onto
hillsides throughout the territory, providing housing for refugees from
Mainland China during Chinese Civil War (Housing Authority 2009). Public
rental housing was introduced beginning in the 1950s in response to ﬁres
in squatter areas and expanded through the 1970s and 80s. However, the
number of public housing units has never satisﬁed demand for them. At
the end of March 2018, the average waiting time for general applicants
for public rental housing was 5.1 years (HKHA 2018). Substandard rental
accommodations in old tene- ment buildings become a last resort for
those who are waiting for public rental housing and those who are
ineligible for public housing but unable to aﬀord private housing. In
spite of their illegality, the prices of these tiny housing units are
rising in tandem with market demand.

Currently, there are approximately 123,600 households living in
substandard accommodations (THB 2018). Among them, 91,800 households are
living in subdivided units, in Cantonese referred to as "Tong Fong".
"Tong" (劏) means "to butcher"; "Fong"(房) refers to housing structures
such as

480

A. O. YIP ET AL.

ﬂats and rooms. "Tong Fong" is criticised as inhumane due to the poor
living environment and small size (Ng 2017). Literally, "Tong Fong"
implies a bloody and barbaric meaning, which is a vivid way to describe
subdivided units and portray the poor living condition of those
households in Hong Kong. According to the oﬃcial statistics, the average
area of sub-divided units per capita is only 62.4 square feet
(approximately 5.8 square metres) (CENSTATD 2016). Although 96.2% of
surveyed sub-divided units are equipped with independent electricity
metres and 87.7% are equipped with windows, most of them are
non-functional or ineﬀective. The discussion part will elaborate on this
point.

The tenancy situation of these substandard accommodations creates a
tenant-landlord relation- ship that underpins the issue of energy
poverty. Although there is no explicit rule, it is a common practice
that the landlord is responsible for settling utilities bills and
recouping the cost from tenants. Landlords may set utilities tariﬀs,
often at signiﬁcantly higher rate than those set by utility companies,
so that in addition to rent they can proﬁt from the diﬀerence between
the actual utility statement and their customised fee. Due to the
shortage of housing and legal loopholes, the terms of leasing contracts
often favour the interests of the landlord. With limited bargaining
power, tenants' rights and interests lack protection.

The issue of energy poverty in Hong Kong mainly surrounds low-income
households living in private rental housing, such as subdivided units
and rooftop houses, rather than public housing. Apart from the poorer
living environment, the former's rental expenses also accounted for more
than 40% of the total expenditure, and the latter only 13.2% (Cheung
2017). A proper understanding to local substandard accommodations,
including its development trajectory, can help in analysing the
relationship between substandard accommodations and energy poverty.

These characteristics, along with foreseeable climate change trends,
energy system transitions and continuing housing market development, lay
an important contextual ground for our discussion of energy poverty in
Hong Kong in the next section.

5.  Findings and discussion

5.1. Energy poverty vulnerability factors are multiple and complex

A clear monetary benchmark enables policy makers to quantify target
groups with a view to increas- ing eﬃciency, but this is not necessarily
eﬀective. By applying an integrated multi-dimensional frame- work, this
study found that the economic-based assumptions underlying policy
interventions may not adequately reﬂect the challenges involved. Our
interviewed households are vulnerable to energy poverty in multiple and
complex ways, which range from accessibility, ﬂexibility, to aﬀordabil-
ity, energy needs, energy eﬃciency, and to household practices. It is
also important to note that phys- ical setting, including apartment size
and design, may limit the supply or availability of energy services, and
also increase households' potential energy consumption. This observation
highlights the coupling between the demand side and supply side of
household electricity, and the resultant impacts on comfort conditions.
The presence of two key vulnerability factors -- low income and poor
housing quality -- is not in itself surprising. More signiﬁcantly these
dimensions are intertwined with others, as discussed below.

5.1.1. The relevance of poor facilities and indoor living environments
to accessibility, energy eﬃciency, and ﬂexibility Substandard
accommodations in old buildings may have been modiﬁed in ways that aﬀect
the acces- sibility of energy-related facilities, and the physical
setting may aﬀect the energy eﬃciency of dwell- ings, increase
households' energy needs, and limit households' ﬂexibility of saving
energy through traditional methods. The limited size of substandard
accommodations may worsen comfort and increase energy needs. lighting,
heating, ventilation and ﬁttings of the cells are adequate to meet the
health needs (HKSAR 1954). Ironically, no such regulations exist for
housing. All of the interviewed households expressed some

In Hong Kong, there is a Prison Ordinance to ensure the size,

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

481

variation of the following: Our home is small and we are crowded
together, so in summer, it is even hotter. Among the households studied
(see Table 2), the living area per capita is not more than 60 ft2 (≈5.57
m2), smaller than a 70 ft2 (≈6.50 m2) single-person cell in a local
prison and, in an extreme case, only 20 ft2 (≈1.86 m2).

Body-generated warmth and daily household activities, such as watching
television and cooking, may exacerbate the heat in such tiny dwellings.
Chester and Morris (2011) state that the amount of energy required for
achieving indoor thermal comfort, such as space heating and space
cooling, can be directly inﬂuenced by poor insulation and inadequate
ventilation. Moreover, poor heat insulation aﬀects energy eﬃciency of
dwellings, which may result in higher cooling needs, especially for
those who live on the top ﬂoor of the building. Windows are critical for
natural illumination and air venti- lation, but they are sometimes
absent or malfunctioning. This is often the case in subdivided units
which lack cross-ventilation (Interviewee C8, S9).

A social worker indicated, I've visited some elderly people lacking
access to some common appliances such as air-conditioners due to the
absence of windows. Instead, they rely on electric fans or go to parks
to ﬁnd respite from the heat (Interviewee S7). Yet, even when windows
are present they may not be usable. They may be located in rooms
reserved for sleep or otherwise ill-positioned for capturing natural
light.

We only have windows in the toilet and bedroom. There is no window in
the living room where my children do homework and study. There is
insuﬃcient sunlight. So even in the daytime, if the children do
homework, I must turn on the lights for them. (Interviewee H2)

However, too much natural light may heat up the indoor environment: "The
unit that I'm living in is too hot and bright ... Even in evening, the
home is still very hot. We have to use curtains for blocking the
sunlight" (Interviewee H3).

5.1.2. The relevance of unpleasant outdoor (external) environments to
ﬂexibility, energy needs and household practices An unpleasant outdoor
environment can be an external factor that challenges households'
ﬂexibility and energy needs. It often traps households in a dilemma
reﬂected in compromised practices -- redu- cing energy expenditure or
securing well-being. Most of the respondents indicated that they often
found it diﬃcult to utilise the windows due to bad odours and poor air
quality outside. If the window frame has not been wiped for a few days,
a layer of thick black dust can be seen ... I know ... the air quality
is not good (Interviewee H1). This woman claims that the poor air
quality is also caused by paint fumes from a car repair garage
downstairs, odour which has aﬀected her son's health condition, but she
has little choice.

I know, but what can I do? If I close the window, I have to turn on the
air-conditioner. But I don't want to, as it adds to the electricity
bills ... But if I open the window, the poor outdoor air quality may
aﬀect my son and it seems that medical expenses increase. (ibid)

The family of Interviewee H3 is also bothered by the poor outdoor
environment. There are two windows in his home, one in the toilet and
the other in their bedroom. However, they do not open the window in the
toilet because it overlooks a space which has accumulated rubbish and
sewage. I tried to open the window once. Then, very soon, I found that
some "new guests" - mice and cockroaches came to my home (Interviewee
H3). Interviewees bemoaned the ways in which the sur- rounding
environment further adds artiﬁcially heated air ﬂow when natural cool
wind is already non- existent. Actually, we are located at the gap
between buildings. And if households above us turn on the
air-conditioner, we feel hotter and stuﬃer (Interviewee H3). According
to Interviewee C8,

Sometimes, the households don't want to turn on air conditioners. But if
their neighbour buildings does it, the hot breeze may aﬀect them. If
they can't stand it, they are forced to turn on air conditioners. As a
result, the temp- erature of the entire community rise.

This situation is common in the densely packed residential
neighbourhoods of Hong Kong.

482

A. O. YIP ET AL.

5.1.3. The relevance of the absence of regulated independent utility
metres to aﬀordability The use of unauthorised and unoﬃcial utility
metres in rented substandard accommodations is common, resulting in
overcharging. This practice, which beneﬁts the property owner, aﬀects
energy aﬀordability (Interviewee H1-5).

Interviewee H2 stated, The metres are actually bought from somewhere and
installed by the owner for the purpose of easier calculation. It is not
an independent electricity metre installed by the Water Supplies
Department and the power company. The accuracy of these metres is
sometimes in doubt (Interviewee S7). Interviewees from diﬀerent cultural
backgrounds and with diﬀerent levels of edu- cation expressed a lack of
clarity concerning how energy tariﬀs are calculated. Interviewee H4, an
immigrant from Pakistan, said

I can read and write neither Chinese nor English, only can speak very
little Cantonese. I don't know the details of the tariﬀ set, I am even
unclear about the amount of my energy consumption. The owner only told
me to hand in the money that he listed on a memo.

In fact, owners have little incentive to install authorised independent
water and electricity metres because they reduce proﬁt and increase the
risk that illegal rental units will be exposed to authorities
(Interviewee E6, S7, C8, S9, S13, A14).

While many are trapped at an impasse, one household beneﬁtted from the
help of their conscien-

tious landlords:

After being forced to relocate, we rent this new unit. We are lucky ...
the owner is better. He transferred the regis- tration name of the
authorized independent meters for us ... I could pay a fairer and more
reasonable energy cost now. No need to be overcharged. (Interviewee H3)

However, the burden of energy costs is still large for this interviewee
due to the same factors encoun- tered by others.

5.1.4. The relevance of tenancy status and to accessibility and energy
eﬃciency Households' tenancy status and tenant-landlord relationships
may aﬀect the accessibility of energy services and investment in energy
eﬃciency. Challenges in accessing energy carriers are not necess- arily
the fault of households falling into arrears in energy bill payments,
but can be the owner's stra- tagem to evict the tenants. It was noted
that some owners wanted to kick out the tenants by deliberately not
paying the utility bills for a long time, resulting in the suspension of
energy supply (Interviewee C8).

An emerging literature points out that the improvement of the energy
eﬃciency of a building or an appliance may lead to a higher level of
energy consumption, resulting in "rebound eﬀects" (Galvin and Gubernat
2016; Sorrell 2015; Wolﬀ et al. 2017). Our study did not conﬁrm this
theory. Intervie- wees did not consume more electricity because they
managed to save money from energy eﬃciency. We, however, found that
there is often a lack of investment in energy eﬃcient appliances owing
to the owners' reluctance and tenants' low purchasing power (Bird and
Hernandez 2012). The reduced elec- tricity expenses of using energy
eﬃcient appliances may be unknown to households. Some interviewed
households even cannot recognise the brands and labels of energy
eﬃciency on their electric appli- ances such as air conditioners
provided by their landlords. Landlords, on the other hand, are not
obliged to supply particular kinds of energy services or eﬃcient
appliances. They are often more inter- ested in securing returns on
investment than ensuring living conditions of tenants, and have no
incen- tive to build gas pipes, install air conditioners or telephone
lines (Interviewee S7 & S9). Due to ﬁnancial constraints, households
usually purchase cheap but energy-ineﬃcient appliances which can be new
or second-hand. Used appliances in particular often are energy ineﬃcient
and are prone to malfunction. Besides, interviewees expressed
uncertainty about the future. Interviewee H3 stated,

I have no spare money to replace them ... I think they are barely enough
to function now ... I'm not sure whether I will relocate or be forced to
move again, it is unpredictable, no one knows ... so, it is not a right
time to buy new one.

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

483

Any high investment in new, energy eﬃcient appliances or thermal
renovation is often desired but not possible for low-income households
because of both ﬁnancial constraints and the landlord- tenant
relationship (Großmann et al. 2014). Our study further highlights that,
in contrast with Europe, thermal renovations in (sub)tropical regions
like Hong Kong are more about cooling and ventilation.

By applying our multi-dimensional framework to our case studies in Hong
Kong, we found that low income, high energy costs and poor housing
quality, which correspond to social, energy, and housing problems in
Hong Kong, were the three key factors contributing to the rise of
domestic energy poverty. These three interrelated factors created
unfavourable conditions, such as poor indoor and outdoor living
environments, an absence of regulated independent utility metres,
discor- dant landlord-tenant relationships. The six energy vulnerability
indicators (namely aﬀordability, accessibility, ﬂexibility, energy
eﬃciency, energy needs, and household practices), were underpinned by
the three key factors, and intertwined with a variety of results. This
study illustrates some repre- sentative situations often encountered by
Hong Kong households. When challenging circumstances are encountered,
additional energy vulnerability indicators arise, resulting in more
frequent and more intense responses and impacts.

5.2. Hidden energy poverty: the limits of the traditional
expenditure-based indicator for identifying energy poor households

The traditional expenditure-based indicator identiﬁes energy poor as
those who spend more than 10% of their income on energy. The
eﬀectiveness of this traditional approach has been debated (Herrero
2017). Our ﬁndings are consistent with the literature, that the
expenditure-based indicator alone is not an eﬀective measure of energy
poverty. As Table 3 shows, only Interviewee H4 spent more than 10% of
their income on energy (12.4%) whilst the ratios of the other four
households were low, ranging from 3.33% to 6.94%. Besides, despite the
low income and high energy costs borne by our interviewees, the actual
energy expense does not necessarily relate to the size of the household
and the level of energy tariﬀs. For example, among the interviewed
households, com- pared with H1 and H2, interviewee H3 has a larger
household size and higher energy tariﬀs but lower monthly energy
expenses. This shows the general problem of the expenditure-based
approach: it fails to address the relationship between households'
responses and impacts in relation to their exposure to poor housing
conditions (Taske et al. 2005). In fact, domestic compensatory
behaviours are not entirely absent in relevant literature on energy
poverty and energy deprivation which has

Table 3. The ratios of energy cost to income of our interviewed
households.

Household

Type

Energy price Tariﬀ per unit

Household monthly income (Average)

Total energy expense (Monthly)

Ratio of EC to I \#

H1

H2

H3

H4

H5

Electricity HK\$1.4/unit HK\$10/m3 Water LPG HK\$280/tank Electricity
HK\$1.5/unit HK\$13/m3 Water LPG HK\$370/tank Electricity HK\$1.5/unit
Water LPG Electricity Unknown Unknown Water LPG HK\$350/tank Electricity
Unknown Unknown Water N/A LPG

HK\$14/m3 HK\$370/tank

HK\$ 16,000

HK\$ 15,000

HK\$1,110

HK\$918

HK\$ 8,680 (S)\* + HK\$10,425 (A)

HK\$725

HK\$ 5,000 (S) + HK\$13,145 (A)

HK\$2,250

HK\$ 18,000

HK\$800

- "S" is "Salary"; "A" is "Allowance from CSSA"; \# "EC" is energy cost;
  "I" is income.

6.94%

6.12%

3.79%

12.4%

3.33%

484

A. O. YIP ET AL.

challenged the usefulness of the traditional 10% threshold (Bouzarovski,
Petrova, and Tirado-Herrero 2014; Chard and Walker 2016; Day, Walker,
and Simcock 2016). Using Hong Kong as an example, our empirical data is
consistent with existing ﬁndings. The data show a decoupling of
low-level ratios and energy well-being, implying that even those well
under the 10% threshold may experience energy poverty in ways that aﬀect
their well-being. This may motivate households to develop survival
tactics to cope with the negative impacts.

Why, then, do households fall into "hidden" energy poverty? Our study
ﬁnds that it is in part because households adopt under-consumption of
energy as a survival mechanism. Households are found to interact with
the built environment and rationing the needs of family members to
consume less domestic energy. This study, similar to Chard and Walker
(Chard and Walker 2016), ﬁnds that households develop a distinctive
temporal and spatial pattern of keeping cool in order to save money on
electricity bills. To maximise enjoyment of cooling under a limited
budget, house- holds often use air-conditioning sparingly around bedtime
when most of the family members are at home. In the daytime residents
try to escape from the hot home to cooler public spaces. Neverthe- less,
socio-demographic factors such as household composition, knowledge of
energy eﬃciency, individual choices and individual mobility, may aﬀect
when, how and where cooling is used or accessed. Our ﬁndings echo the
point made in the extant literature (Brounen, Kok, and Quigley 2012;
Besagni and Borgarello 2018) that, apart from physical and technical
determinants, economic behaviour, demographic factors and individual and
family-based compensatory practices cannot be ignored when discussing
energy consumption, especially with regard to energy poverty.

5.3. Households' responses to perceived vulnerability to energy poverty

This section further explains that the shortcomings of traditional
expenditure-based indicator stem from its neglect of households'
self-imposed constraints to restrain their energy consumption. We found
that household practices sometimes may lead to unintended consequences
and households may not be visible in measures such as the energy poverty
benchmark.

5.3.1. Temporal and spatial pattern of cooling Space cooling was an
important theme in interview questions concerning energy use habits. Air
con- ditioning, for example, is highly desired but begrudgingly used due
to the high cost (Interviewee E6, C8, S9, A10, S13). Comfort and
convenience are compromised by ﬁnancial concerns and air condition- ing,
though preferable, is not "essential". Interviewee H3: We told ourselves
that using electric fan is enough ... I told my children to endure the
heat until they go to bed. Full-time mothers, who are more likely to be
at home during the daytime, are also reluctant to use air-conditioning.
According to Anderson, White, and Finney (2012), households with people
at home for the majority of the day were most likely to ration their
energy use, as is the case for Interviewee H1 and H2: I worry that using
air-conditioning for a whole day would cost much more ... . I only turn
on the air-conditioner at night

Table 4. Households' responses on electricity and water uses. 1
Interviewee

Electricity i ii iii Water i ii iii iv v vi

Reduce use of air-conditioning Leave home for cooling Reduce the use of
hot water

Retain and reuse water Block the toilet ﬂushing tank Collect dripping
water Clothes washing by hand Do laundry at relatives' home Shower at a
public toilet

Y Y

Y

Y

2

Y Y Y

Y

Y

3

Y Y Y

Y Y Y Y

Y

4

Y N/A Y

Y

Y

5

Y Y

Y

Y Y Y

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

485

when whole family needs to sleep. Parents and children, however, have
diﬀerent priorities, with the former often willing to endure challenging
conditions but responding leniently to their children's requests. In
order to keep their children asleep, parents often turn on
air-conditioning at night but turn it oﬀ before they go to bed to
conserve energy (Interviewee H1-5). Especially interviewee H4 who has an
infant, predicts his domestic energy consumption will increase
signiﬁcantly in order to provide adequate care. This reveals that
household composition may aﬀect the ﬂexibility of energy-saving
practices.

However, misuse of technology can sometimes result in the failure of
households' energy-saving practices to achieve their aim because of the
ineﬃcient usage of the electric appliances (Sorrell 2015; Wolﬀ et
al. 2017). Although most of the interviewed households occasionally turn
on the air condi- tioner at night, the use of an electric fan in
conjunction with air conditioning -- which can speed up the room cooling
and help reduce the energy consumption of air-conditioner (Interviewee
E11, E12) -- varies. Many households do not turn on the electric fan
when they turn on the air conditioner.

Going to a shopping mall or public stadium can provide respite and
reduce household energy use (Interviewee H1, H2, H3, H5). In fact,
escape to a cooler space or warmer space is a response that can be found
elsewhere, including in the UK, where people go to the library or ride
the bus to ﬁnd warmth at a free or low cost (Interviewee A10). However,
some of our interviewees were prevented from doing so due to health
challenges, especially those who lived in old buildings without lifts.
Inter- viewee H4: my wife suﬀers from waist and joint pains, it is
diﬃcult for her to climb up and down the staircase. This shows that a
household member's health condition can be one of the determinants of
energy consumption.

5.3.2. Adjusting daily routines to save water Water usage relates to
energy poverty because some daily activities require the combination of
water and electricity to meet basic needs, including food and personal
hygiene (Day, Walker, and Simcock 2016). For example, electric kettles
and water heaters are used to provide cleaner and safer drinking water,
demonstrating both hygiene and food safety concerns. Four households
interviewed for this study still do not have oﬃcial independent water
metres and are often overcharged by landlords, suﬀering from relatively
high water tariﬀs as a result. Accompanied with the absence of access to
sea water, which in Hong Kong is used for toilet ﬂushing, they have to
pay for the water used for this purpose, while most others do not.
Reusing water for ﬂushing the toilet is a common response. All the
interviewed households stated that they retain water used for washing
vegetables and rice, and for cleaning the ﬂoor and clothes. Some even
disable the toilet ﬂushing system. Other house- holds may collect
dripping water for reuse (Interviewee H3 and H5). All the interviewed
households washed clothes by hand, especially in the summer, to avoid
the frequent use of the washing machine. Interviewee H5 does laundry at
his relative's home. To further save on water expenditure, the family of
interviewee H3 showers at a public toilet. In a typical Chinese family,
the woman has a greater say and ability to mobilise the whole family to
save expenses in daily life. In this study, it is possible to discern
the impact of the gendered division of family roles on the household's
habits of energy use.

5.4. Impacts on well-being

Interviewed households respond to their perceived vulnerability to
energy poverty, which sub- sequently impacts their well-being in terms
of health, education, family relationships, and dignity. This reﬂects
that the households' comfort conditions cannot be fully captured by the
income-expen- diture proportion.

Cooling and air-conditioning are important for thermal comfort which is
closely related to health. In spite of the very hot and stuﬀy conditions
inﬂuenced by speciﬁc characteristics of the physical setting, households
are often reluctant to use air conditioning, especially if there is only
one person at home. This may lead to adverse health impacts (Interviewee
E6, C8, S9, S13), including the quality of sleep (Interviewee S13).

486

A. O. YIP ET AL.

The same set of factors that aﬀect health can impact learning activities
that school-aged children undertake at home. Children may become
fatigued and face diﬃculty concentrating on their study. Older children
may do homework outside their home in places such as fast food shops
(Interviewee H1, H3, H5), an option not available to young children
(Interviewee H2, A10).

Family relationships are also adversely aﬀected. Disputes and conﬂicts
on energy use between the family members are frequent and are most
likely to occur between children and parents. Children blame their
parents for the uncomfortable living environment and insuﬃcient use of
energy to fulﬁl their needs. On the other hand, parents balance the
needs of their families with concern about the energy burden:

My young children don't know it is hard for daddy to earn a living and
sustain this family ... They always blame me for relocating to here
(rooftop housing) as it is hot. If I don't allow them turn on the
air-conditioner, they will grumble. (Interviewee H4)

The actual situation of households is sometimes hidden, and may be far
beyond our observation and imagination, especially when it touches the
issue of dignity, including resorting to bathing in a public toilet to
save water and energy (Interviewee H3). This information was disclosed
by a social worker who requested the authors to avoid asking questions
regarding this shameful experience. This family has been forced to
relocate due to excessive water bills, suggesting tenant energy con-
sumption is a source of proﬁt for their landlord. In this case, as in
others, the owner would rather drive his tenants away than accept a loss
of illegitimate revenue (Interviewee S9). In extreme cases, people
facing such conditions may end up joining the growing number of
"McRefugees" sleep- ing in Hong Kong's 24-hour McDonald's restaurants
(Zhao 2018). Interviewee A10 emphasised an important message -- energy
poverty is about more than survival; as a problem it requires us to ask
whether people can live a decent and digniﬁed life.

6.  Concluding discussion and policy implications

Energy poverty and vulnerable households in the context of
sustainability transitions are impor- tant but under-studied. Hidden
energy poverty in wealthy sub-tropical cities like Hong Kong has
received little attention in the academic literature and policy debates.
This study argues that the traditional expenditure-based indicator has
limited eﬀectiveness in capturing diverse experiences of energy poverty
because of the neglect of households' daily lived experiences, including
their compensatory behaviours. Its primary aim is to advance the
literature on hidden energy poverty and ﬁll in blank spots on a global
energy poverty map by conceptualising energy poverty in Hong Kong
through a multi-dimensional framework. We contribute to the energy
poverty literature in three ways.

Firstly, this paper provides greater clarity to the ways in which energy
poverty often fails to align with expenditure-based indicators. There is
growing evidence that expenditure-based indicators may misestimate the
households' disposable income and energy needs (Baker 2011; Hills 2011;
Snell, Bevan, and Thomson 2014, 2015). This paper sheds new light on
household-based behaviours and practices in relation to expenditure
burdens which may prevent them from reaching the energy poverty line.
According to Grevisse and Brynart (2011), the outcomes of energy poverty
often have knock-on eﬀects. This study has also found that for those
vulnerable households, the low aﬀordability of energy services, together
with the limited accessibility, ﬂexibility and poor energy eﬃciency,
further enlarge the energy burden. The high proportion of income
allocated to housing costs aﬀects expenses in other areas, including
energy services (Robinson, Bouzarovski, and Lindley 2018). Inter-
viewees reported foregoing other expenses, including entertainment,
social activities, and even food. Here, the categories of "want" and
"need" are blurred. Hirsch, Preston, and White (2011) found that on
average, low income households consume only about two-thirds of their
theoretical "need", and most are likely to be energy under-consumers.
This statement conﬁrms our ﬁnding that households reduce their energy
expenditures in various ways which can hide their real energy needs.

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

487

Secondly, this study adds to a limited body of empirical work by
proposing an integrated frame- work to assess energy poverty that may
not be captured by the 10% indicator. It explores the poten- tial of the
application of this framework in the Hong Kong context. Findings show
that energy poor households are exposed to a complex set of
vulnerability factors, respond in a variety of ways in order to cope
with such challenges, and that such responses impact their health,
learning environment, family relationships, as well as dignity. Although
previous studies on strategies for coping with energy poverty have
predominately come from cold climate contexts, they reveal complexity of
a similar nature: that energy poor households often fall below the
generally accepted societal standard of decent living because they need
to ration their energy use and adjust their daily routines (Brunner,
Spitzer, and Christanell 2012; Chard and Walker 2016; Day and Hitchings
2009; Harrington et al. 2005). Thirdly, this paper focuses on the
emerging notion of "hidden" energy poverty to capture those vulnerable
households that disappear from precise energy poverty statistics or
benchmarks due to their very low consumption or disconnection from
energy management systems. In doing so it advances the energy poverty
literature by focusing on the diversiﬁed lived experiences of aﬀected
households, revealing how decisions involve trade-oﬀs between energy
expenditure and well- being. The paper thus adds to a growing number of
studies (see, for example, Willand and Horne 2018) that assert the value
of going beyond expenditure-based indicators which have a tendency to
obscure the social issues underpinning energy poverty. Our ﬁndings are
consistent with the litera- ture that despite the low proportion of
income spent on energy, households use various means to self-regulate
and ration their energy use, often sacriﬁcing well-being in various ways
(Brunner, Spitzer, and Christanell 2012; Chard and Walker 2016;
Middlemiss and Gillard 2015; Thomson, Bouzar- ovski, and Snell 2017;
Willand, Maller, and Ridley 2017). The households' under-consumption of
energy is obviously the survival mechanism of energy poor households.

The relevance of this study to the sustainability literature,
speciﬁcally the social aspects of energy transition (Kemp, Parto, and
Gibson 2005) reveals policy implications. Energy poverty intersects with
key features of energy security, speciﬁcally "availability" and
"aﬀordability". Therefore, in an age of resource depletion and energy
precarity, researchers and policy actors need to pay more attention to
justice and other social aspects the sustainability agenda, especially
the eﬀects of low carbon and energy policies on disadvantaged groups.

More speciﬁcally, since vulnerability to energy poverty embodies
relationships between energy, social, and housing policies, we argue
that multiple voices are needed at the table, including those of
government and utilities companies, but also others from the private and
community sectors. Although Hong Kong has relatively aﬀordable energy
compared with some other cities, its provision is controlled by two
geographically monopolistic power companies whose guaranteed rates of
return are regulated by the government. Moreover, in a city with one of
the highest housing costs in the world, energy justice intersects with
housing justice. Hong Kong's shortage of aﬀordable housing has pushed
many people into smaller, lower quality, less energy eﬃcient and more
precarious housing settings, amplifying their vulnerability to energy
poverty in many ways that are diﬃcult to discern and regulate. This is a
problem of distributional justice and procedural justice as mentioned by
Fuller and McCauley (2016) and McCauley et al. (2013). Additional
attention should thus be given to non-economic indicators of energy
poverty in policy formulation. Such an approach can be complemented with
the engagement of a broader range of stakeholders working in areas
related to diﬀerent elements of this complex issue, including authorised
indepen- dent utility metres, living standards, building design and
maintenance, and tenancy law.

This is an initial attempt to conceptualise energy poverty in Hong Kong,
an urban context that is aty- pical in many respects, especially in
relation to the cities that have formed the basis of the majority of the
existing energy poverty literature. In spite of this, Hong Kong shares
much in common with New York, Taipei, Tokyo and some other established
and emerging global cities. Under current trajectories, this list will
grow, as urban inequality intensiﬁes along with extreme heat and
unpredictable weather events stemming from climate change. This study
therefore has relevance beyond Hong Kong and can contrib- ute to a
better understanding of energy poverty in developed cities, particularly
in East Asia.

488

A. O. YIP ET AL.

Acknowledgements

The authors would like to thank all interviewees for participating in
this study, especially those interviewed households for their
willingness to share their personal experience with us. We also
gratefully acknowledge two reviewers for their valuable comments on our
paper. We remain solely responsible for all errors, omissions, and views
expressed in the paper.

Note

1.  These tiny spaces are stacked vertically and include not much more
    space than a bed.

Disclosure statement

No potential conﬂict of interest was reported by the author(s).

ORCID

Lachlan B. Barber

http://orcid.org/0000-0002-3353-8507

References

Anderson, W., V. White, and A. Finney. 2012. "Coping with low Incomes
and Cold Homes." Energy Policy 49: 40--52. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2012.01.002.

Baker, W. 2011. "Reaching the Fuel Poor." Making the Warm Home Discount
Work, Consumer Focus. Besagni, G., and M. Borgarello. 2018. "The
Determinants of Residential Energy Expenditure in Italy." Energy 165:
369--386.

doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.energy.2018.09.108.

Bird, S., and D. Hernandez. 2012. "Policy Options for the Split
Incentive: Increasing Energy Eﬃciency for low-Income

Renters." Energy Policy 48: 506--514.

Boardman, B. 1991. Fuel Poverty: From Cold Homes to Aﬀordable Warmth.
London: Belhaven Press. Boardman, B. 2010. Fixing Fuel Poverty:
Challenges and Solutions. London: Earthscan. Bouzarovski, S., and S.
Petrova. 2015. "A Global Perspective on Domestic Energy Deprivation:
Overcoming the Energy

Poverty--Fuel Poverty Binary." Energy Research & Social Science 10:
31--40.

Bouzarovski, S., S. Petrova, and S. Tirado-Herrero. 2014. From Fuel
Poverty to Energy Vulnerability: The Importance of

Services, Needs and Practices.

Bouzarovski, S., and N. Simcock. 2017. "Spatializing Energy Justice."
Energy Policy 107: 640--648. Brounen, D., N. Kok, and J. M. Quigley.
2012. "Residential Energy use and Conservation: Economics and
Demographics."

European Economic Review 56 (5): 931--945.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.euroecorev.2012.02.007.

Brunner, K.-M., M. Spitzer, and A. Christanell. 2012. "Experiencing Fuel
Poverty. Coping Strategies of low-Income

Households in Vienna/Austria." Energy Policy 49: 53--59.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2011.11.076.

CENSTATD. 2016. "Thematic Household Survey Report No. 60: Housing
Conditions of Sub-Divided Units in Hong Kong."

https://www.statistics.gov.hk/pub/B11302602016XXXXB0100.pdf.

Chard, R., and G. Walker. 2016. "Living with Fuel Poverty in Older Age:
Coping Strategies and Their Problematic

Implications." Energy Research & Social Science 18: 62--70.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2016.03.004.

Charmaz, K. 2006. Constructing Grounded Theory: A Practical Guide
Through Qualitative Analysis. London: SAGE Publication. Chester, L., and
A. Morris. 2011. "A New Form of Energy Poverty is the Hallmark of
Liberalised Electricity Sectors."

Australian Journal of Social Issues 46 (4): 435--459.

Cheung, N. T. 2017. Poor Households's Rental Expenses Acoount for more
than 40% of Total Expenditure; more than four times paid by
public-housing householders (in Chinese).
https://www.hk01.com/%E7%A4%BE%E6%9C%83%E6%96%
B0%E8%81%9E/124590/%E7%A4%BE%E8%81%AF-%E7%A7%81%E6%A8%93%E8%B2%A7%E7%AA%AE%E6%88%
B6%E6%AF%8F%E6%9C%88%E9%80%BE%E5%9B%9B%E6%88%90%E9%96%8B%E6%94%AF%E7%B9%B3%E7%
A7%9F-%E9%87%91%E9%A1%8D%E5%A4%9A%E5%85%AC%E5%B1%8B%E6%88%B6%E8%BF%914%E5%80%8D.
Chu, S. Y., and H. Schroeder. 2010. "Private Governance of Climate
Change in Hong Kong: An Analysis of Drivers and

Barriers to Corporate Action." Asian Studies Review 34 (3): 287--308.

Cludius, J. M. 2015. Distributional Eﬀects Of Energy and Climate Policy.
(doctor of Philosophy), UNSW Australia Business School.
https://www.sccer-crest.ch/ﬁleadmin/user_upload/Cludius_2015\_-\_Distributional_Eﬀects_of_Energy.pdf.
Consumer Council. 2015. Future Energy Policy Should Consider "Energy
Poverty". https://www.consumer.org.hk/ws_chi/

choice/463_09.

LOCAL ENVIRONMENT

489

Corbin, J. M., and A. Strauss. 1990. "Grounded Theory Research:
Procedures, Canons, and Evaluative Criteria." Qualitative

Sociology 13 (1): 3--21.

Day, R., and R. Hitchings. 2009. "Older People and Their Winter Warmth
Behaviours: Understanding The Contextual

Dynamics".

Day, R., G. Walker, and N. Simcock. 2016. "Conceptualising Energy use
and Energy Poverty Using a Capabilities

Framework." Energy Policy 93: 255--264.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol.2016.03.019.

Dubois, U. 2012. "From Targeting to Implementation: The Role of
Identiﬁcation of Fuel Poor Households." Energy Policy 49:

107--115.

EMSD. 2018. Hong Kong Energy End-use Data 2018.
https://www.emsd.gov.hk/ﬁlemanager/en/content_762/

HKEEUD2018.pdf.

ENB. 2017a. Hong Kong's Climate Action Plan 2030+. Environment Bureau
https://www.enb.gov.hk/sites/default/ﬁles/pdf/

ClimateActionPlanEng.pdf.

ENB. 2017b. New Scheme of Control Agreements with the two power
companies. (LC Paper No. CB(4)925/16-17(01)). Legislative Council
Retrieved from
https://www.legco.gov.hk/yr16-17/english/panels/edev/papers/edevcb4-925-1-e.
pdf.

Environment Bureau. 2014. Future Fuel Mix for Electricity Generation
Consultation Document. https://www.enb.gov.hk/

sites/default/ﬁles/en/node2605/Consultation%20Document.pdf.

Fuller, S., and D. McCauley. 2016. "Framing Energy Justice: Perspectives
From Activism and Advocacy." Energy Research &

Social Science 11: 1--8. doi:10.1016/j.erss.2015.08.004.

Fullerton, D. 2011. "Six Distributional Eﬀects of Environmental Policy."
Risk Analysis: An International Journal 31 (6): 923--

929. 

Galvin, R., and A. Gubernat. 2016. "The Rebound Eﬀect and Schatzki's
Social Theory: Reassessing the Sociomateriality of

Energy Consumption via a German Case Study." Energy Research & Social
Science 22: 183--193.

Global Wealth Report 2017. 2017.
http://rogerannis.com/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/Credit-Suisse-Global-Wealth-

Databook-2017.pdf.

González-Eguino, M. 2015. "Energy Poverty: An Overview." Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 47: 377--385. doi:

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.013.

Gouveia, J. P., J. Seixas, and G. Long. 2018. "Mining Households' Energy
Data to Disclose Fuel Poverty: Lessons for Southern Europe." Journal of
Cleaner Production 178: 534--550.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.01.021. Grevisse, F., and M.
Brynart. 2011. "Energy Poverty in Europe: Towards a More Global
Understanding." Eur. Counc. Energy

Eﬃc. Econ 71: 537--549.

Großmann, K., A. Bierwirth, S. Bartke, T. Jensen, S. Kabisch, C. von
Malottki, ... J. Rügamer. 2014. "Energetische Sanierung: Sozialräumliche
Strukturen von Städten Berücksichtigen." GAIA-Ecological Perspectives
for Science and Society 23 (4): 309--312.

Harrington, B. E., B. Heyman, N. Merleau-Ponty, H. Stockton, N. Ritchie,
and A. Heyman. 2005. "Keeping Warm and Staying Well: Findings From the
Qualitative arm of the Warm Homes Project." Health & Social Care in the
Community 13 (3): 259--267.

Healy, J. D. 2004. Housing, Fuel Poverty, and Health: a pan-European
Analysis. Aldershot: Ashgate Publishing. Healy, J. D., and J. P. Clinch.
2002. "Fuel Poverty, Thermal Comfort and Occupancy: Results of a
National Household-Survey

in Ireland." Applied Energy 73 (3): 329--343.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/S0306-2619(02)00115-0.

Herrero, S. T. 2017. "Energy Poverty Indicators: A Critical Review of
Methods." Indoor and Built Environment 26 (7): 1018--

1031. 

Hills, J. 2011. "Fuel Poverty: The Problem and its Measurement". Hirsch,
D., I. Preston, and V. White. 2011. "Understanding Fuel Expenditure:
Fuel Poverty and Spending on Fuel". HKHA. 2018. Number of Applications
and Average Waiting Time for Public Rental Housing. Hong Kong Housing
Authority
https://www.housingauthority.gov.hk/en/about-us/publications-and-statistics/prh-applications-average-waiting-
time/index.html.

HKSAR. 1954. Cap. 234 Prison Ordinance. H. K. e-Legislation. 6.1. HKTDC.
2018. Economic and Trade Information on Hong Kong.
http://hong-kong-economy-research.hktdc.com/business-

news/article/Market-Environment/Economic-and-Trade-Information-on-Hong-Kong/etihk/en/1/1X000000/
1X09OVUL.htm.

Hong Kong Observatory. 2018a. Number of Hot nights observed at the Hong
Kong Observatory since 1884, exclude 1940-

1946. https://www.hko.gov.hk/cis/statistic/hngtday_statistic_e.htm.

Hong Kong Observatory. 2018b. Weather Warning and Signals Record
(18/May/2018). http://www.hko.gov.hk/cgi-bin/

climat/warndb_ea.pl?start_ym=20180518.

Housing Authority. 2009. "History of Estates: Historical Background of
Shek Kip Mei Estate." Light & Shade life passes in

old estates.
https://www.housingauthority.gov.hk/hdw/en/aboutus/events/community/heritage/about.html.

Ingrao, C., J. Bacenetti, A. Bezama, V. Blok, P. Goglio, E. G. Koukios,
... D. Huisingh. 2018. "The Potential Roles of bio- Economy in the
Transition to Equitable, Sustainable, Post Fossil-Carbon Societies:
Findings From This Virtual Special Issue." Journal of Cleaner Production
204: 471--488. doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jclepro.2018.09.068.

490

A. O. YIP ET AL.

Kao, E. 2017. "Hot Summer Nights Could Be Bigger Killers than Daytime
Scorchers, Hong Kong Researchers say." South China Morning Post.
https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/health-environment/article/2105568/hot-summer-
nights-could-be-bigger-killers-daytime.

Kemp, R., S. Parto, and R. B. Gibson. 2005. "Governance for Sustainable
Development: Moving From Theory to Practice."

International Journal of Sustainable Development 8 (1-2): 12--30.

Lee, B. Y. 2010. Warm Nights.
http://www.weather.gov.hk/blog/en/archives/00000076.htm. Mah, D. N.-y.,
P. Hills, and J. Tao. 2014. "Risk Perception, Trust and Public
Engagement in Nuclear Decision-Making in Hong

Kong." Energy Policy 73: 368--390.

Mah, D. N.-y., J. M. van der Vleuten, P. Hills, and J. Tao. 2012.
"Consumer Perceptions of Smart Grid Development: Results

of a Hong Kong Survey and Policy Implications." Energy Policy 49:
204--216.

Mah, D. N.-y., G. Wang, K. Lo, M. K. Leung, P. Hills, and A. Y. Lo.
2018. "Barriers and Policy Enablers for Solar Photovoltaics (PV) in
Cities: Perspectives of Potential Adopters in Hong Kong." Renewable and
Sustainable Energy Reviews 92: 921-- 936.

McCauley, D. A., R. J. Heﬀron, H. Stephan, and K. Jenkins. 2013.
"Advancing Energy Justice: the Triumvirate of Tenets."

International Energy Law Review 32 (3): 107--110.

Middlemiss, L., and R. Gillard. 2015. "Fuel Poverty From the Bottom-up:
Characterising Household Energy Vulnerability Through the Lived
Experience of the Fuel Poor." Energy Research & Social Science 6:
146--154. doi:https://doi.org/10. 1016/j.erss.2015.02.001.

Miniaci, R., C. Scarpa, and P. Valbonesi. 2014. "Energy Aﬀordability and
the Beneﬁts System in Italy." Energy Policy 75: 289--

300. 

Mould, R., and K. J. Baker. 2017. "Documenting Fuel Poverty From the
Householders' Perspective." Energy Research &

Social Science 31: 21--31.

Ng, N. 2017. "Average Living Space for Hong Kong's Poorest Residents
Same as that of Prisoners, Survey Reveals." South China Morning Post.
https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/community/article/2117810/average-living-space-
hong-kongs-poorest-residents-same.

Okushima, S. 2016. "Measuring Energy Poverty in Japan, 2004--2013."
Energy Policy 98 (C): 557--564. doi:10.1016/j.enpol.

2016.09.005.

Palmer, G., T. MacInnes, and P. Kenway. 2008. "Cold and Poor: An
analysis of the link between fuel poverty and low

income." Report New Policy Institute.

Petrova, S., M. Gentile, I. H. Mäkinen, and S. Bouzarovski. 2013.
"Perceptions of Thermal Comfort and Housing Quality: Exploring the
Microgeographies of Energy Poverty in Stakhanov, Ukraine." Environment
and Planning A 45 (5): 1240--1257.

Rademaekers, K., J. Yearwood, A. Ferreira, S. Pye, I. Hamilton, P.
Agnolucci, ... N. Anisimova. 2016. "Selecting indicators to

measure energy poverty." Trinomics: Rotterdam, The Netherlands.

Robinson, C., S. Bouzarovski, and S. Lindley. 2018. "'Getting the
Measure of Fuel Poverty': The Geography of Fuel Poverty Indicators in
England." Energy Research & Social Science 36: 79--93.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.09.035. Rübbelke, D. T., and S.
Vögele. 2011. "Distributional Consequences of Climate Change Impacts on
the Power Sector: Who

Gains And Who Loses?"

Snell, C. J., M. A. Bevan, and H. R. Thomson. 2014. "Fuel Poverty and
Disabled People: The Impact of Policy Change". Snell, C., M. Bevan, and
H. Thomson. 2015. "Justice, Fuel Poverty and Disabled People in
England." Energy Research & Social

Science 10: 123--132.

Sorrell, S. 2015. "Reducing Energy Demand: A Review of Issues,
Challenges and Approaches." Renewable and Sustainable

Energy Reviews 47: 74--82.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rser.2015.03.002.

Sovacool, B. K., C. Cooper, M. Bazilian, K. Johnson, D. Zoppo, S.
Clarke, ... H. A. Raza. 2012. "What Moves and Works: Broadening the
Consideration of Energy Poverty." Energy Policy 42: 715--719.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.enpol. 2011.12.007. Stirling, A. 2009.
Development".

"Direction, Distribution and Diversity! Pluralising Progress in
Innovation, Sustainability and

Tam, J. 2012. "200,000 Households Trapped Below Energy Poverty Line."
South China Morning Post. https://www.scmp.

com/news/hong-kong/article/1109318/200000-households-trapped-below-energy-poverty-line.

Taske, N., L. Taylor, C. Mulvihill, N. Doyle, J. Goodrich, and A.
Killoran. 2005. Housing and Public Health: A Review of Reviews

of Interventions for Improving Health. Evidence Brieﬁng: National
Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence.

THB. 2018. Long Term Housing Strategy Annual Progress Report 2017.
https://www.thb.gov.hk/eng/policy/housing/policy/

lths/LTHS_Annual_Progress_Report_2017.pdf.

Thomson, H., S. Bouzarovski, and C. Snell. 2017. "Rethinking the
Measurement of Energy Poverty in Europe: A Critical Analysis of
Indicators and Data." Indoor and Built Environment 26 (7): 879--901.
doi:10.1177/1420326X17699260. Thomson, H., and C. Snell. 2013.
"Quantifying the Prevalence of Fuel Poverty Across the European Union."
Energy Policy

52: 563--572.

WGO. 2012. "Over 210,000 "Energy Poor" Households in Hong Kong \[Press
release\]." http://thewgo.org/website/eng/

news/energy-poverty/.

Willand, N., and R. Horne. 2018. ""They are Grinding us Into the Ground"
-- The Lived Experience of (in)Energy Justice Amongst low-Income Older
Households." Applied Energy 226: 61--70.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apenergy.2018.05. 079.

Willand, N., C. Maller, and I. Ridley. 2017. ""It's not too bad" - The
Lived Experience of Energy Saving Practices of Low- Income Older and
Frail People." Energy Procedia 121: 166--173.
doi:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2017.08.014. Wolﬀ, A., I. Weber, B.
Gill, J. Schubert, and M. Schneider. 2017. "Tackling the Interplay of
Occupants' Heating Practices and Building Physics: Insights From a
German Mixed Methods Study." Energy Research & Social Science 32:
65--75. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.erss.2017.07.003.

Zhao, S. 2018. "Number of People Sleeping in Hong Kong McDonald's
Branches Skyrockets, as Residents Battle High Rents and Substandard
Housing." South China Morning Post.
https://www.scmp.com/news/hong-kong/community/
article/2158365/number-people-sleeping-hong-kong-mcdonalds-branches.


