How do urban characteristics change with distance from Victoria Harbour, Hong Kong? Name:  Joseph Bao Word count:  2231 words Candidate number:  Table of Contents 1. Introduction   ···········································································   3 1.1 Location of  S tudy ··········································································   3 1.2 Maps ·························································································   3 1.3 Background  T heory ··················· · ····················································   4 1.4 Hypothesis ··················································································   4 2. Methodology ··········································································   5 3. Data Presentation &amp; Analyses  ······················································   7 3.1 Hypothesis 1 ················································································   7 3.2 Hypothesis 2 ················································································   8 3.3 Hypothesis 3 ················································································  9 4. Conclusions ··········································································  10 5. Evaluation ············································································  10 6.  Bib liography ·········································································  11 7. Appendix ··············································································  11 1.  Introduction 1.1  Location of Study Hong Kong, one of  the Special Administrative Regions of the People’s Republic of China, is home to around 7.5 million residents and is one of the most densely populated areas in the world  with around 6,900 people per square kilometre.   Hong Kong is a massive trade port,  with the busiest cargo airport  in the world ,  it  handled  around 4.9 million tonnes of  air  cargo in 2024, which accounted for around 45% of  the total value of Hong Kong’s external trade (equivalent to around HK$4,300 billion ) .  For  this study,  we are  investigating on the Kowloon peninsula,  which forms the southern part of Hong Kong’s main landmass, it lies on the north bank of  Victoria Harbour and   faces toward Hong Kong Island on the other side. Fig .  1. 2. 1  Fig .  1. 2. 1  1.2  Maps Fig 1. 2. 1 shows the location of Hong Kong in Asia.  It is located on the southern coast of China, bordering the province of Guangdong to the north, and the South China Sea to the south. Fig .  1. 2 .2   Fig .  1. 2 .2   Fig 1 .2 .2 is a map of Hong Kong with  major districts labelled.  Hong Kong has many areas that can be considered  Central Business Districts ( CBDs ) ,  such as Tsim Sha Tsui, Central or Admiralty. For this invest igation, we will be focusing on Tsim Sha Tsui as the main CBD , which is located on the north bank of Victoria Harbour. Fig .  1. 2. 3  Fig .  1. 2. 3  Fig 1 . 2 .3 shows a zoomed in map of Kowloon  with Nathan Road highlighted,  which is  the site of our investigation. Nathan Road  runs  along the main length of the Kowloon peninsula,   from the Victoria Harbour waterfront at its intersection with Salisbury Road in Tsim Sha Tsui to its intersection with Boundary Street in Mong Kok. 1.3  Background Theory Fig .  1. 3.1   Fig .  1. 3.1   The Burgess Model (see Fig. 1. 3.1 ), otherwise known as the concentric ring model , is an urban model  developed in 1925 which divides  cities into a series of concentric rings, each being one zone. At the  centre  lies the central business district (CBD) , this is where  most of a city’s  commercial and financial activities occur. It is often  characterised  by  its high concentration of office buildings,  businesses , retail stores, and mostly high-rise buildings.  According to the model, the next area outside of the CBD is the  transitional zone. This is characterised by  older buildings , factories and industries, therefore with close to zero high-rises. Next is the  old  inner-city  area, which includes low-class residential buildings for the working class to live in.  Outside of the inner city is a zone of slightly better residential buildings , which are newer, larger and include more amenities. The outermost ring is the suburb, which features high class residential buildings for the rich.  This model helps us understand how a “standard” urban city should  look, and we can compare this to how Hong Kong is  laid out , to see if it  fits  the Burgess model . 1.4  Hypotheses Noise level will decrease with distance from the CBD :  The CBD  is the busiest  area of the city  with lots of people  and commotion , therefore as you move away from the  it  the amount of people  and traffic  should decrease, and  therefore  the noise levels should  decrease with it . Building height will decrease with distance from the CBD :  Most buildings in the CBD are high-rise buildings ,  so as you move away from it  to a less wealthy area of the city , the amount of these high-rise buildings would decrease. High order services will decrease with distance from the CBD :  The CBD  has  lots of business activit y  and therefore  will usually have more higher order services, so when you move away from it, the amount of these services would start to decrease  as the amount of business activity decreases . 2.  Method ology Method Type of data collected How we did it Why we did it Link to hypothes es Decibel reading Quantitative Using a decibel meter app  (see Fig. 2.1 on the next page)  on our phones, we held the phone into the air and took a decibel reading. We repeated it three times and took the average reading . So that  we could find out how loud it is at different points along Nathan Road, this helps us assess how busy the areas are, as busier areas will be louder on average. This links to the hypothesis ‘ Noise level will decrease with distance from the CBD ’ ,   it will help us prove whether it is true or not. Building height count Quantitative For the four  closest buildings to us,  we  counted  the number of floors using the windows as a guide. We later took the average for the four readings.  (See Fig 2.2, one of our sites on the next page , located on Nathan Road ) This is to show how the building height will differ when we move away from  our defined CBD. This links to the hypothesis ‘ Building height will decrease with distance from the CBD ’ , as it will help us see whether it is true that buildings become shorter as you move away. High/Low order services Qualitative By looking around at ground level, we determine whether most of the shops around us have high order goods and services or low order.  (Also see Fig 2.2 for the  shops  around Nathan Road) This was done to investigate if the amount of high and low order services changes with distance from our CBD. This links to the hypothesis ‘ High order services will decrease with distance from the CBD ’, we will be able to see whether the amount of high order services will change. Fig .   2 . 1  Fig .   2 . 1  Fig .   2 . 2 Fig .   2 . 2 Fig .   2 . 2  Fig .   2 . 2  3.  Data  Presentation &amp; A nalyses 3.1  Hypothesis 1:  Noise level will decrease with distance from the CBD Fig .   3 . 1 .1   Fig .   3 . 1 .1   Fig 3 .1 .1 shows a line graph of decibel readings at different distances from Victoria Harbour. According to this graph, we can see that the decibel readings with distance from the Harbour varies a lot,  the graph  has sudden  spikes  around 100m, 700m , and 1300m  away from the Harbour .  A likely cause for these fluctuations may be that a car may have drove past suddenly  when the reading took place, which caused the reading to be higher than normal. Other reasons may be that the areas happened to be around construction sites, therefore the reading will vary throughout the year when there is no construction happening.  Additionally,  a typhoon was approaching Hong Kong at the time of data collection,  which meant that Hong Kong was affected by heavy showers  and strong winds. Winds would have contributed to the fluctuations in noise level, as  phone microphones will pick up  the wind as loud noises when it blows over it.   Looking at the overall trend of the graph, although the points  are distributed  sparsely  on the plot,  the  average reading is still becoming lower as you move away from the harbour. The low  correlation could be  because  our data collection sites  were  centred around Nathan Road, therefore the conditions would be similar, factors such as traffic or man-made noise is unlikely to change as you are moving along the same road , especially because Nathan Road is not particularly long. 3.2  H ypothesis 2:  Building height will decrease with distance from the CBD Fig .   3 . 2 .1 Fig .   3 . 2 .1 Fig 3.2 .1  shows a scatter plot  of the average building heights in different areas of Hong Kong against their distance from Victoria Harbour. Through this graph we can see that the correlation between the distance from Harbour and the average building height is minimal, although the line of best fit is still shown with a negative slope , which connotates a negative correlation. This means that the building height does  become lower on average with distance from the Harbour, however the difference is minimal. This is most likely  because   Hong Kong has too little usable land, therefore  new buildings have no space to  be built , so  all buildings  must  be built up wards , which makes for higher buildings everywhere. The  highest building  from the plot is  around 700m away from Victoria Harbour, which further proves that Hong Kong’s buildings are mainly built high up due to the lack of space, and it doesn’t depend that much on the distance from the CBD. However, as mentioned above, Nathan Road is quite short and therefore the scope of  this investigation is not as wide as it could have been.  It  may  be possible that if we move even more north, the height of the buildings will  decrease  more, as there is already a negative correlation present in this graph.  However,  residential areas in northern Hong Kong will also  make the average heights higher, as apartment buildings in Hong Kong are built up extremely high. 3.3  Hypothesis 3:  High order services will decrease with distance from the CBD Fig .   3 . 3 .1 Fig .   3 . 3 .1 Fig 3.3 .1  shows a bar chart of high and low order services for  each distance interval away from Victoria Harbour. Looking at the  blue bars, we can see that the amount of high order services overall isn’t  decreasing  that much. However, the amount of high order services in relation to low order services does decrease with distance from the waterfront, which we can see by comparing the blue and orange bars.   It is worth not ing  that  there were more data  collection sites  at the dista nce range furthe st  fr om the harbour , as they were closer together .   Therefore,  this does  show us that  there were more low order services there on average. However, when it comes to comparing the number of high order services with the number of low order services,  this does mean that it is not as accurate as it could be. Similar to the average building height, we would probably see a larger decrease in the numbers of high order services if our data collection scope could move more north, as we can  see from the graph that the number of low order services clearly is increasing by a lot, and in turn the number of high order services  should also  start decreasing  more .  However, as Hong Kong  is quite rich, sites in the same area may still have  variance in the level of service, as one area may be near a big mall, and the other may  be on a tiny lane with nothing around.   4.  Conclusions Hypothesis 1:  Noise level will decrease with distance from the CBD T he graph above (Fig. 3.1.1 )  shows a negative correlation between the distance from CBD and the noise levels.   However,  the fluctuations within the data set  are  too big, therefore I would reject this hypothesis. Hypothesis 2:  Building height will decrease with distance from the CBD Fig. 3.2 .1  above shows a negative correlation  for the building height in relation to the distance from the CBD, therefore I accept this hypothesis.   Hypothesis 3:  High order services will decrease with distance from the CBD The data from  Fig. 3.3 .1   for  high order services  has fluctuations and it still stays at around the same values, therefore I would reject this hypothesis as well. 5.  Evaluation Positives of my study For this study overall, the collection of data and the compilation of that data   went very well.   Firstly, the data collection was very efficient with students split up into groups and spreading out to the different data collection sites.  Everyone had equal involvement in the tasks, which was quite good. What could have gone better? How I would improve this The first  problem with some of the data collection is that we were all using a phone app for the noise level data set, however not every phone will have the same set of microphones, and therefore some may be more sensitive, and some may filter out more  excess noise. Additionally, the building height count could also be improved as  only counting the number of windows gives quite a vague estimate, especially because more modern buildings tend to have more  extravagant window designs that may not directly translate to the number of storeys.  Lastly, it would have also been better if we could go out on a day with better weather, as the storm would have also contributed to  extra noise overall. To  address the noise data issue, I  believe it would be better  for all of us to use a standardised  equipment, such as a proper decibel meter,  this can eliminate the variations  caused by the difference in microphones used. For building height, I believe  if we were allocated more time, it could have been potentially possible for us to go into the building to investigate the number of usable storeys instead of counting windows. For the issue with the weather, simply waiting a few days for the weather to clear up would  possibly make  the investigation better .   6. Bibliography “Wikimedia.”  Wikimedia.org , 2025,   upload.wikimedia.org/wikipedia/commons/9/96/Hong_Kong_in_Asia_%28-mini_map_-rivers%29.svg. Accessed 6 Sept. 2025. Cool Geography. “Characteristics of an Urban Area.”  Coolgeography.co.uk , 2020,  www.coolgeography.co.uk/GCSE/Year%2010/Human%20World/Land%20use%20models/Landuse%20models.htm . 7. Appendix